From: Jason Ashley <jasona@warwick.net>
To: "'noharmm-l@eskimo.com'" <noharmm-l@eskimo.com>
Cc: "'restoration@foreskin.com'" <restoration@foreskin.com>
Subject: Argument Methods
Date: Thu, 4 Apr 1996 15:20:24 -0500
Encoding: 157 TEXT
Sender: owner-restoration@lists.primenet.com
Precedence: bulk

Dear All,

I've been reading a lot lately about how much trouble many of us have 
dealing with pro-circ people (professional or parent) who refuse to 
consider the medical and ethical material we have in our favor.  It seems 
that many of us become angry and upset, losing objectivity and instead 
resort to name calling when we cannot convince a person to relinquish his 
or her pro-circ beliefs.

I for one, cannot understand how anyone cannot see just how terrible 
circumcision is whether practiced upon a boy or girl.  I saw a remarkable 
TV show the other night about animal intelligence and the heated debate 
within the animal behaviorist community about how self-aware animals are 
and whether or not animals can feel pain.  There is a considerable body of 
opinion that animals, including the higher mammals such as primates (we 
share 99.4% of our DNA with chimpanzees), do not feel pain and are 
incapable of any sort of self-aware thinking.  As I watched this I was 
stunned by the number of scientists who still subscribe to the Renaissance 
belief that animals are little more than organic robots despite the 
researched and anecdotal proofs of several hundred years to the contrary.

Throughout this program I was amazed how much so many of these arguments 
sounded exactly like the arguments used by pro-circ doctors who insist that 
the human infant is incapable of feeling pain, unaware of what is happening 
to him or her, or cannot remember any part of what is happening whether 
consciously or subconsciously, and refuse to consider the ethical questions 
which arise from such a practice.

Which leads me to say that sometimes a logical and proof-laden argument 
sometimes isn't worth squat when arguing our point.  Plenty of people in 
this world have little concept of logic or innate tendency to it.  It is 
impossible, no matter how much we would like, to win these people using 
logical precepts or methods.  Socratic dialectic is marvelous so long as a 
target is susceptible to its value, otherwise it's no more than the fooler 
becoming the fool himself.

For such people who cannot conceive logical arguments, the only route is to 
probe for just how these people do make decisions and follow, no matter how 
ridiculous, the same path.  If someone makes major life decisions and 
philosophies based on the Flintstones, then try and impress that person 
with how relatively new circumcision is and how Barney and Betty would 
never have had Bam-Bam circumcised.  If someone uses fortune cookies then 
invite them to dinner, bake up your own damn fortune cookies and make sure 
the target gets the loaded fortune cookie!  (They are easy to make.)

More often a person resistant to logic uses emotion or family-ways to make 
personal decisions where logic does not necessarily enter.  Such people 
become resistant to any change of thought because they see 
counter-arguments as an attack upon their intelligence, family, culture, 
and tradition.  No amount of medical or ethical information will change the 
mind of someone who feels under personal attack.  Worse, such argument can 
cause deeper entrenchment.  When these are the circumstances, make your 
argument a friendly and depersonalized one.  Try and befriend the person 
first.  Show how much you deeply believe in your feelings without 
belittling those who believe otherwise (bite your tongue if you have to). 
 Keep your words and, if in person, body language open and unthreatening. 
 Convey how much you are concerned about the practice and that the 
information you have isn't meant to harm, but to heal.  That you once 
believed (even if you haven't) how right circumcision was for exactly the 
same reasons your target believes it is.  That you considered, first and 
foremost, the emotional impact of circumcision and how heart-rendering it 
was when you discovered what it was like when before you thought it was 
such a natural choice.

Remember that many parents who have already circumcised a son refuse to 
believe that they have inflicted such trauma on their child particularly if 
the father is circumcised as well.  Arguing against a choice they 
previously made in good faith and interest in welfare requires a different 
approach.  Currently much of the material we have only serves to show how 
barbaric the parents were in choosing circumcision and how cruel their 
action was.  We attack circumcision and we attack the parents themselves. 
 Any resolve we make in this issue has to be made with the feeling of the 
parents themselves as the priority.  Don't regale them with stories 
reminiscent of Thomas DeTorquemada, instead offer them naturalness as a 
better alternative to circumcision.  If you have to, tell them that 
circumcision is a reasonable choice but that leaving alone is perhaps a 
little better and offer them friendly, objective resources like a 
pediatrician they respect in the community (you should always know if you 
have at least one community doctor who is on your side).  Talk to them 
based upon what you know and skew your argument to what you know they 
value.  If they are health-conscious, then emphasize the health benefits; 
the infection prevention that the foreskin provides; the glans' natural 
state as an internal organ mirroring it with the female clitoris; the 
cleansing action of smegma and the physical protection the foreskin 
provides.

If they are religious, emphasize the letters of St. Paul and Maimonides 
arguing against it.  Point out that no Christian Church requires 
circumcision and indeed, under the health plan of the New York archdiocese 
of the Catholic Church, routine circumcision is not a covered expense so 
committed are they to the philosophy of the natural state.

Jewish parents may not respond to Christian authored moral treatises on the 
subject, but do make sure they are aware of alternative bris ceremonies 
which many congregations allow as substitutes to the traditional bris. 
 Emphasize how circumcision was performed in the day of Abraham (when only 
the tip of the foreskin was removed) and again, if you can find a respected 
rabbi in the community who sympathizes with your point, give the name to 
the parents.  At the very least, if they must circumcise try very hard to 
convince them to remove as little of the skin as possible.

If they have moral concerns about the greater opportunity for the future 
son to commit acts such as masturbation (and there are still plenty of 
these sorts out there) or be more randy than a circumcised boy, then point 
out that no matter how tightly circumcised a boy is, masturbation is 
possible and that a proper education is no substitute for a surgery that 
places the seat of sexual arousal out in the open.  Point out that 
masturbation is more socially acceptable now then when it was before 
circumcision.  In fact, the foreskin allows to keep the glans from 
unnecessary and opportune stimulation and can prevent a chance occurrence 
of masturbation (try not to laugh, ok?).  Very surprisingly, I have found 
that the argument for greater sexual satisfaction works with this group the 
most.  The point that coitus is more pleasurable for the intact man and his 
wife.  That the vagina is less likely to dry out and that it is easier to 
introduce an uncircumcised penis to a woman who may not have been married 
(I know, I know) before.  Be careful before introducing religion to this 
group.  They may know more than you do and may only respect their 
particular Church's authority on the matter.  Know your scripture and 
respected religious scholars who have written on the matter.

If the parents are educated and respect scholarly sources, then introduce 
them to the material you do have from scholarly sources and of course, 
logic may well work here.

In short, you can't win everyone with the same argument.  Many people allow 
pride to blind their reason and with these people you must, I repeat MUST 
tailor your argument to the situation.  If you have to swallow your pride 
and play to your target's sympathies and beliefs then do so.  Where logic 
and reason won't work, play to emotions and concerns which directly address 
what your audience believes is important.  Moral and medical superiority 
won't win you anything except resentment.

All this may seem manipulative and underhanded to some people, but I have 
to say that I don't see anything immoral in trying as best I can to 
convince someone of a point which I believe is right.  There is no trickery 
involved, nothing underhanded or misleading.  To do so would be to plant a 
landmine which WILL later explode and ruin whatever solid work has been 
done.  Argue consistently and reasonably in whatever way works best with 
your target without lying or misleading.  Use techniques that fit your 
targets' lifestyle choice-making methods and your chance of success will be 
far, far better and based upon truth rather than convenient fictions (which 
is all the pro-circ people have left, BTW).  Don't allow your emotional 
commitment to make you act morally and logically superior and if you can't 
win today, do not, above all, DO NOT belittle or smear your targets' 
failure to come around to your view.  If you can't do it now, maybe someone 
somewhere else will.  Don't poison a future opportunity with memories of a 
past encounter.

Dear God this is long, but I hope everyone has read it because it is so 
necessary that we act as best we can to halt the practice of routine 
circumcision in this world.  I know some readers may not have the same 
views I have and that's fine with me.  I just believe so strongly that I 
hope to appeal to others who do to.  As always, I hope this helps.  With 
thanks, I am,

Sincerely,
Jason Ashley.


