In article <4g4if7$rki@canopus.cc.umanitoba.ca>,
John Pritchard  <jpritcha@mbnet.mb.ca> wrote:

 DOCN  YUPD9430
 TI    CIRCUMCISION MAY PLAY IMPORTANT ROLE IN 
           SPREAD OF HIV
 DT    940808
 AU    Edward Stim
 SO    CONFERENCE NEWS: Published by The Organizing 
Committee of the Tenth International Conference on 
AIDS/International Conference on STD 1994 - Yokohama, 
Japan; Distributed Electronically by GENA/hivnet 
The most convincing data came from his 14-month 
prospective study that started with initially HIV-
negative men. After 14 month, the highest numbers of 
HIV-seroconverters were the uncircumcised, genital 
ulcerpatients (48%) and the lowest, the circumcised, 
nongenital ulcer group(2.6%). In between in incidence 
were the uncircumcised, no-ulcer group(26% ) and the 
circumcised, ulcer group (12%). This highly significant
finding, implicating the foreskin as a major AIDS risk 
factor is backed up by a meta-analysis of 28 studies, 
26 of which suggest a strong correlation between HIV 
seroconversion and an uncircumcised penis. According 
to the combined data, the presence of a foreskin
increases the risk of HIV infection 3-fold, and, if one 
includes a prospective 10-year period of usual exposure 
to HIV, circumcision has the potential of reducing the 
seroconversion rate of an at-risk population from 15% 
to 0.7% after 10 years.



JP -I have abstracts and articles on the relationship
between HIV and circumcision which I would be
pleased to send by e-mail.
GF- So do I. It looks like there's no difference, or 
else circ INCREASES HIV infection. See http://theorem.math.rochester.edu/no circ
/med/00INDEX
JP- Re hiv-1 and hiv-2 . I saw 
no reference to suggest that circ increases HIV. 
Hugh Young uses one report that states that 17.7% 
of uncircumcised men and 8.4% of circumcised 
men misclassified themselves. Hugh extrapolates 
these observations  to undermine a different report 
made at a different time in a difference place - the 
Kreiss-Hopkins report.  He criticizes the 
Kreiss- Hopkins report but fails to publish it. With 
Hughs writing it is difficult to know whether 
he is quoting or editorializing.  The Kreiss-Hopkins 
report is given at the end of this posting
JP- Re hiv 3. I will leave it to the reader to judge 
the merit of this report.
