Date: Fri, 10 May 1996 01:54:47 -0700 (PDT)
Reply-To: noharmm-l@eskimo.com
Originator: noharmm-l@eskimo.com
Sender: noharmm-l@eskimo.com
Precedence: bulk
From: Chuff@prodigy.com (MR MARTIN B NOVOA)
To: Multiple recipients of list <noharmm-l@eskimo.com>
Subject: Informed Consent
X-Listprocessor-Version: 6.0c -- ListProcessor by Anastasios Kotsikonas



Raider of Darkness wrote:

Help me understand this!  Is there still such a thing as a doctor 
doing a 
RIC w/out a consent?!?!?!   How is that possible!?!?!?  I don't 
understand!  Is this current?

Disturbed,

Jens



Jens, Jens, Jens,

I am even more disturbed than you -- by what you wrote!

How clueless are people in this country?!?  Are millions really 
unaware of all the wrongful circumcision lawsuits out there?

Circumcision could NEVER have reached the nauseatingly high 
proportions it has in this country (93% of all hospital births at its 
worst) without coercion and blantant disregard for the wishes of some 
parents.

When I was in law school in the mid-1980's, I did an extensive 
research of the case law on circumcision.  What I learned was that 
the landmark cases in this area were from 1969 and 1972.   In both 
cases, the fathers were intact, they absolutely did not want their 
sons circumcised, sent registered letters to the doctor and the 
hospital threatening legal action if the son was circumcised, and yet 
both boys got cut.

In court, the doctors said it was an error -- but still demanded 
their fees.  The parents lost in both cases.  Why?  The reasoning of 
the judge in one explains it all:  boiled down, he effectively said 
that the parents failed to prove a harm.  In fact, the what the 
doctor did was CONFER upon the boy a uniquely American cultural 
BENEFIT.  The parents should be thanking the doctor instead of suing 
him, but to make them feel better, they don't have to pay his fee 
because technically they didn't ask for the benefit.  No conclusion 
was ever reached on whether the doctor circumcised the boy 
deliberately to try to collect a fee (or make the boy a 'Mericun), or 
whether it was just an error. 

Sadly, this is still good case law today.


Yes, Jens, unauthorized circumcisions take place every day in America.
  And that doesn't count the badgering!  Friends of mine have 
described this scene.......the mother is presented with a combo 
maternity admission/circumcision consent form.  In other words, if 
you want to have your kid here, he's gonna be cut.  Period.

Or, if you get your lawyer to show you how to properly cross that out 
or if the hospital admission form is separate, the mother can count 
on being approached at her most vulnerable moment to sign the 
circumcision consent form, such as shortly before or after labor.  
One friend told me that before she delivered, she was harrassed by a 
nurse who would not take no for an answer, and finally said that she 
had to get the consent or the doctor and hospital were going to be 
really pissed (a quota system??).

Others have told me how they were casually told by Nurse #1 to sign 
the circumcision consent form, and when it went unsigned they were 
treated to a lecture about locker room embarrassment and horrible 
infections the boy could look forward to.  When still no signature, a 
more senior nurse visited.  Still no.  Then the Pediatrician was 
trotted in, and finally the OB/GYN, demanding to know what the 
problem was.  Sometimes the pressure on the mother is unbearable 
(often the father is left out of the picture entirely) and sometimes 
if the mother continues to behave in this irresponsible fashion they 
cut the kid anyway, knowing insurance will pay.

My dear friend June had two very disturbing experiences:  with her 
first son, 3 1/2 years ago, June and Marco virtually had to fight not 
to have him circumcised.  Then the doctor and hospital both put in 
claims for their circumcision fees with the insurance company.  June 
saw this (she was her company's benefits coordinator) and refused 
payment.  The doctor and hospital threatened to take action.  On the 
phone with them, they became belligerent, claiming that of course the 
baby was circumcised, all babies are circumcised.  She still 
patiently explained her son was intact.  When two weeks later they 
still would not believe her and continued to demand payment, she 
offered to come to their offices and change her son's diaper in front 
of them so they could see what a foreskin looks like.  They left her 
alone after that.

With her next birth, a throughtless (or cruel) nurse asked her if she 
wanted the baby circumcised.  June's baby was born with a congenital 
heart condition that was known in advance through ultrasound, and 
died six days after birth.  Still, the nurse is required to ask.

Another woman I have corresponded with learned that her newborn baby 
had been circumcised shortly before being prepped for life-saving 
spinal surgery.  What is wrong with these people?


Yes, Jens, unauthorized circumcisions take place all the time today, 
and they have for the last 50 years since insurance has automatically 
reimbursed it.  Even more disturbing, CONTRAINDICATED circumcisions 
take place every day:  of haemophiliac babies, of those with 
hypospadias, of premies, of low birth weight babies, and of those 
facing life-threatening conditions.  Circumcision is just, well, 
automatic.  What is changing in America is not the medical attitude 
toward circumcision, it is individual doctors.  Whereas 25 years ago 
it would have been well nigh impossible to find a doctor who would 
NOT circumcise for any reason, today some younger MDs are willing to 
deliver without circumcision, not collect a fee, and therefore not 
put a high-risk child at further risk.

Some attorneys are starting to make a nice living from unauthorized 
and botched circumcisions as the courts slowly realize that 
unauthorized circumcisions are unauthorized surgery and can even be 
construed as battery.

Hope this clears things up a little.  Tell that to your friends in 
Germany.....or here.

Relentlessly,

Martin

"Cut a Boy, Go to Jail"



