
                     CIRCUMCISED MICE

     The preputials are modified sebaceous glands of unknown
function. . . . Preputial glands also tend to be heavier in
dominant as compared to subordinate males among grouped mice of
wild strains. 

     Based on the above findings, we postulated that secretions
from the preputial glands influence fighting behavior. This paper
shows that fighting behavior is modified when one, but not both
members of paired male mice have been preputialectomized. . . . 

     Ten to 14 days after either preputialectomy or sham surgery,
mice were paired in a cage unfamiliar to each individual. During
a 15-min observation period (under red light), presence or
absence of fighting, latency of attack, total fights, and
accumulated attacking time (4) were recorded, and relative social
rank was assigned when possible. . . .

     Results. Pairs in which both members were preputialectomized
and those in which both members were sham-operated did not differ
for any of the behavioral parameters examined . . . Mean latency
of attack was not significantly less in encounters involving one
preputialectomized and one sham-operated male . . . but total
fights and accumulated attacking time were greater . . . In older
males . . . the occurrence of fighting was increased among pairs
comprised of a preputialectomized and a sham-operated animal
(fighting occurred in 18 of 20 pairs of mixed surgical treatment
as compared to 3 of 10 sham-operated pairs . . .

     Preputialectomized males initiated the first attack in 45 of
71 encounters when paired with sham-operated males . . .

     Summary. Indices of aggressive behavior were measured in
paired male house mice which previously had been
preputialectomized or sham-operated. Total fights and attacking
time were increased in pairs comprised of a preputialectomized
and a sham-operated animal as compared to that observed in sham-
operated pairs. Preputialectomized males also showed a tendency
to initiate first attacks of a paired encounter . . .

Effect of Preputialectomy on Fighting Behavior in Mice (34779)
           Ted D. McKinney and John Christians
      Albert Einstein Medical Center, Research Laboratories,
                     Philadelphia, PA 19141
Proceedings of the Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine,
vol. 134. no. 1 (May 1970): pp. 291-293
