McGill
June 10, 1992


The Honourable A. Kim Campbell
Minister of Justice
and Attorney General of Canada
Ottawa, Ontario K1A OH8

Dear Minister,

I have been sent a copy of your letter, dated May 6, 1992, to Dr.
Tom Anderson concerning the legality of both male and female
circumcision.

This is a matter which has been brought to my attention on several
occasions and with much greater frequency of late. I have, also,
in the past, adopted the position taken in your letter--that male
circumcision should be regarded as legal and female circumcision
as illegal, in particular, under the Criminal Code--but, I have
some difficulty in explaining this position and do not find that
this difficulty is resolved by your letter. Your letter states that
"there are no federal or provincial laws dealing expressly with
the legality of male circumcision," and, at least implies that,
therefore, this procedure is legal. But the same is true for  female
circumcision and, yet, as your letter, rightly states, this would
be considered illegal under the Criminal Code.

May I suggest that any wounding, and clearly circumcision  involves
this, is "prima facie" illegal, unless it can be justified. Initially,
a therapeutic aim was the sole justification for such an intervention.
More recently, it has been argued an alternative justification is
possible, in that, some non-therapeutic interventions (those that
are not contrary to public policy) are legal with the informed
consent of an adult (for the record, I have written on this
elsewhere, see Somerville, "Medical Interventions and the Criminal
Law: Lawful or Excusable Wounding?" (1980) 26 McGill Law Journal,
(1) 82-96). In the case of a male infant such consent is not a
possibility, and neither, in the vast majority of cases, could the
intervention be considered therapeutic. This means that one would
have to find other justification for the intervention. The only
possibility, which comes to mind, would be that the harm involved
is de minimis and, therefore, should not to be taken into account
by the law. I am not sure, however that we can any longer  claim
this with regard to male circumcision. Possibly, an  argument along
the lines of respect for religious and  cultural freedom of the
parents provided that the intervention is, indeed, of minimal harm,
could be considered. But again, I am uncertain that this would
justify wounding that involves irreversible consequences, and the
issue remains of whether only minimal harm is involved.

There are also some forms of female circumcision, which  would be
no more harmful than male circumcision, and, possibly, less harmful.

However, I agree with you that these, also, should be prohibited.
But in this case, it makes it even more difficult to determine why
we would continue to regard male circumcision as legal and allow
it.

As I have many inquiries on this matter and because I have also,
been receiving a great deal of literature from groups who are
opposed to male circumcision, I would be grateful for any help that
your Department were able to provide me with, regarding this matter.


Yours sincerely,

[signed]

Margaret A. Somerville, AM FRSC
Gale Professor of Law,
Professor
Faculty of Medicine:
Director
McGill Centre for Medicine,
Ethics and Law
[Montreal, Quebec]

++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

                    A. Kim Campbell, PC, QC,
                    MP Minister of Justice and
                    Attorney General of Canada
                    Ottawa, Canada
                    K1A 0H8
                    Dec 15 1992

Dec 15, 1992

Ms. Margaret A. Somerville
Director
McGill Centre for Medicine,
Ethics and Law
24th Floor
2020 University Street
Montreal, Quebec
H3A 2A5

Dear Ms. Somerville,

Thank you for your thoughtful letter of June 10, 1992, about female
genital mutilation and male circumcision. I regret that I was unable
to reply earlier.

I am grateful to you for drawing my attention to your  article on
medical interventions in the McGill Law Journal. I am certainly
not at this time going to suggest that you are mistaken in the
analysis you present in your letter. However, it is my position
that another mode of discourse is possible on these topics.

I do not believe that it is always helpful to discuss in  detail
whether a particular act is or is not strictly speaking contrary
to a provision of the Criminal Code. As you know, there are many
acts that occur daily that may, strictly speaking, be contrary to
the Code, you they are nevertheless not prosecuted because they
are not offensive to society.

In response to this line of reasoning it is sometimes  objected
that one should not rely on prosecutorial discretion in criminal
law matters. To this, my reply would be that Canadians are lucky,
broadly speaking, in their criminal law, which is expressed in
general terms and thus is not riddled with sections stating, for
example, that deliberately hitting someone is illegal but deliberately
bumping into them on the bus is not illegal. But, having a  criminal
law expressed in general terms does necessarily entail the existence
of a prosecutorial discretion. At the same time, I am fully aware
that society's opinion can change regarding whether a particular
act that could be considered criminal, should in fact be prosecuted.

In the conclusion of your article you state that medical  interventions
are not regarded in practice as prima facie illegal, and that some
non-therapeutic interventions are accepted by our society. In my
opinion these points are crucial in connection with female genital
mutilation and male circumcision.

I do not believe that the issue of the therapeutic value of  male
circumcision has been finally decided in the medical literature.
But regardless of this, it remains true that in our society male
circumcision is at present accepted and indeed has been for many
years. As I mentioned above, I am aware that there may come a time
when this is no longer so. Furthermore, I am not yet persuaded that
male circumcision can be said to cause harm that is above the de
minimis level.

On the other hand, female genital mutilation is not at  present
accepted in our society. I am fully aware of the respect and
protection offered in Canada to multiculturalism and it is my
opinion that female genital mutilation goes beyond the limit of
what multiculturalism will allow. In addition, it must be stressed
that female genital mutilation undoubtedly causes harm that goes
well beyond the de minimis level. I gather that there is apparently
an uncommon form of female genital mutilation that may not cause
serious harm, but I do not believe that this procedure is currently
accepted in our society.

I hope my reply will be of some use to you. In closing, I  wish to
repeat that, if the medical profession reaches a consensus that
male circumcision is harmful beyond the de minimis range, or if
female genital mutilation becomes accepted in our society, then I
will certainly re-examine my opinions on these topics.

                    Yours sincerely,
                    (signed)
                    A. Kim Campbell

+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Margaret A. Somerville
Director
McGill Centre for Medicine,
Ethics and Law
3690 Peel Street
Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 1W9

January 28, 1993

The Honourable Pierre Blais
Minister of Justice
and Attorney General of Canada
Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0H8

Dear Minister,

I am in receipt of a letter of December 15, 1992, from the former
Minister of Justice, the Honourable A. Kim Campbell, regarding
infant circumcision, a matter on which we have been in correspondence.
With respect, this letter has not assisted me in finding a  clear
justification for male infant circumcision---in fact, it raises
further difficulties. My comments in this letter are in response
to statements in the Honourable Kim Campbell's letter.

Whether or not an act which "technically" offends the Criminal Code
will be prosecuted under it, depends on whether, first, the act in
question falls within what we would regard as a social exception.
An act that is considered to be contrary to public policy cannot
be justified pursuant to its being regarded as a social  exception
and any act that involves more than de minimis harm is likely to
offend public policy, unless it is otherwise justified, for instance,
a therapeutic aim is involved and there is informed consent. In
short, social exception and de minimis harm are linked concepts.

The statement in the Minister's letter that "deliberately hitting
someone is illegal but deliberately bumping into them on the bus
is not illegal" can be queried. Usually, deliberately bumping into
a person on the bus would prima facie be an assault (unintentionally
doing so is almost certainly within a social exception). But whether
or not such an assault would be prosecuted is a matter of whether
the harm involved is so de minimis that it does not merit prosecution,
which is often the case. Therefore, this example is not analogous
to infant circumcision (and does not indicate whether or not this
constitutes an offence, and if so, whether or not it should be
prosecuted), if the latter involves more than de minimis harm.

The Minister refers in her letter to my article in the  McGill Law
Journal in which I suggest, in the conclusion, that some non-therapeutic
interventions on competent adult  persons, which in practice are
not considered contrary to  public policy (donations of organs for
transplantation or  cosmetic surgery), despite their involving more
than de  minimis harm, could be justified by regarding informed
consent and therapeutic aim as alternative rather than  cumulative
justifications of them within the Criminal Code.  Contrary to the
way in which the Minister may, from her  letter, have interpreted
my proposal, this would mean that  for those incompetent to consent
for themselves, which  necessarily includes all infants, a
non-therapeutic  intervention that involves more than de minimis
harm would  not fall within any exception justifying it within the
Criminal Code. This, of course, is exactly the difficulty  faced
with respect to justification of male circumcision. In  the vast
majority of cases, this is not generally regarded as  therapeutic,
except possibly at a very tenuous level. Indeed, opponents of male
circumcision regard it as the antithesis of therapy.

Further, with respect, I disagree that male circumcision involves
only de minimis harm, as the Minister indicates in her letter. An
analogous example may make this clear. let us suppose that there
is a new group in Canada which decides that, shortly after birth,
the right earlobe of all children born into the group will be
removed in order to identify them as belonging to that group. I
believe that this would be prohibited under our Criminal Code as
it currently stands. It would involve more than de minimis harm
and as such it would not fall within any social exception and would
be regarded as contrary to public policy. It would be an assault
with wounding which was not justified by any therapeutic aim, the
only justification which would seem to be potentially relevant.
And, yet, this procedure may well be less harmful to the children
subjected to it than is male circumcision to the children subjected
to that, which indicates that de minimis harm is not an appropriate
justification of male circumcision.

There is and needs to be a great deal of sympathy for the  maintenance
of tradition and for freedom of religious belief  (and clearly male
circumcision is very strongly connected with both of these concerns).
But we need to be very careful  about our justification of it and,
concurrently, our condemnation of female circumcision (with which
condemnation  I strongly agree), if we are not to run the risk of
acting in an inherently inconsistent manner and simply on the basis
that what we have always done is acceptable (because we have always
done this) and that customs and traditions which are  strange to
us (but which may [be] no more harmful or less  harmful than those
we accept) are unacceptable.

Over the years, because of my work in medicine, ethics and  law,
I have been approached on numerous occasions about the issue of
male infant circumcision. I am finding it more and  more difficult
to justify this. In particular, the allegation that it constitutes
child abuse needs to be taken very seriously, and I do not find it
easy to explain why this is not the case. Further, in this respect
we need to be aware of recent research that shows that pain caused
to infants (and this is true of all those unable to describe
verbally their pain) is grossly under-rated. Moreover, under the
analysis of the law which I propose in my article, and to which
the Minister refers in her letter, male circumcision would not be
totally banned. Rather circumcision of those persons unable to
consent for  themselves (which would, of course, include all infants)
would not be allowed under the Criminal Code as it presently
stands.

Yours sincerely,

(signed)

Margaret A. Somerville, AM, FRSC
Gale Professor of Law,
Professor
Faculty of Medicine;
Director
McGill Centre for Medicine,
Ethics and Law

++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++



October 17, 1995

Ms. B. Malofie
Box 10, Grp. 546, RR 5
Winnipeg, Manitoba
R2C 2Z2

Dear Ms. Malofie,

In response to the questions raised about the letter of 29 May
1995, to Mr. John Sawkey from the Minister of Justice, The Honourable
Alan Rock:

It is correct that the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms only
applies to government actions, not private acts carried out by
individuals or corporate entities.  However, passage of legislation
is a government action.  Therefore, if it were true that the Criminal
Code protected persons of a certain sex and a certain age against
bodily mutilation, but not other persons of a different sex or a
different age, this would constitute inequality pursuant to a
government act, that is, the enactment of the Criminal Code, which
would attract Charter scrutiny.

In my opinion, with respect, the difficulty with this letter from
the Minister of Justice, is that it still does not address the
basic issue, namely, that both non-therapeutic male circumcision
and female genital mutilation are interventions on a child that,
"prima facie," constitute a criminal assault.  The issue then, is
whether such a "prima facie" assault can be excused or justified.
It would be, if the intervention were necessary medical treatment
to which the parents have given valid free and informed consent.
Or, alternatively, if the intervention could be regarded as "de
minimis," that is, so trifling that the criminal law should not
concern itself with it.  For example, I believe that ear piercing
would probably fall under this latter justification especially if
it is reversible.

As far as I am aware, the Criminal Code does not specifically
prohibit female genital mutilation, but this is prohibited by the
prohibitions on assault, and not justified or excused, pursuant to
an analysis such as I have set out above.  The question is whether
male circumcision is likewise prohibited.  In my view it would be
unless it can be justified on the grounds that either: (a) there
is a clear therapeutic aim; or (b) it is "de minimis"; or (c)
possibly, there is some exception on the basis of religious freedom,
that allows ritual circumcision of males.  (I hasten to add that
I have never seen this proposed or argued and it would raise the
issue of whether some form of female genital mutilation could,
likewise, be justified.)  With respect to the latter proposition,
it would be interesting and worthwhile to analyze the recent judgment
of the Supreme Court of Canada in the Sheena B. case concerning
whether Jehova's Witness parents may, on the basis of religious
belief and freedom of conscience, refuse blood transfusions for
their child.  Although this involves a vastly more serious outcome
for the child than male circumcision, it would still be relevant
to see how the principles adopted by the court in that case would
apply.  I have not yet had time to undertake any such analysis,
but I have the intuition that this would be an informative line of
reflection and research.  The only other possibility for justifying
male circumcision would be to amend the Criminal code to include
an express provision allowing this.

You should also keep in mind that even when a person is potentially
liable for a a criminal offence, there can be the exercise of
prosecutorial discretion which results in a decision not to prosecute.
Perhaps the letter of the Honorable Minister of Justice is best
understood from this perspective, in that the persons are not
prosecuted for carrying out male circumcision, but will be for
undertaking female genital mutilation.

I  hope that this helps to clarify the issues and does not add
further to the confusion.



Yours sincerely,

[signed]

Margaret A. Somerville, AM FRSC
Gale Professor of Law,
Professor
Faculty of Medicine;
Director
McGill Centre for Medicine,
Ethics and Law


+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Margaret A. Somerville
Director
McGill Centre for Medicine,
Ethics and Law
3690 Peel Street
Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 1W9

March 21, 1996

Mr. Geoffrey T. Falk
The Fields Institute
222 College Street
Toronto, Ontario
M5T 3J1

Dear Mr. Falk,

In response to your letter of March 9, 1996, your information, that
I did not receive a reply to my letter to the Honourable Kim Campbell
when she was Minister of Justice is not correct.  A copy of her
reply is attached as well as my responses to this, the latter of
which was sent to the Honourable Pierre Blais who replaced Mme
Campbell as Minister of Justice.

With respect to the letter to you from the Honourable Allan Rock,
I would not disagree with the substance of what he has written
concerning female genital mutilation.  But the issue, whether male
circumcision should be allowed as simply a personal moral decision
on the part of the parents, nevertheless remains.  Further, one
needs to be careful with using, as he does, the absence of disapproval
of this procedure on the part of the medical profession as a basis
for its legitimacy.  In my understanding, in the vast majority of
cases, male circumcision is not intended primarily as a therapeutic
intervention.  While it is true that Canadian law does permit some
not-therapeutic interventions, these are only allowed, in general,
where they are "de minimis" (for example, ear piercing), or the
person on whom they are carried out is a competent, consenting
adult (for example, cosmetic surgery).  Personally, I would be more
comfortable if male circumcision, if it were to be justified, were
held to be such on the basis of freedom of religious expression
and belief and respect for cultural practices.  Moreover, approaching
the matter in this latter way would at least cause us, as a society,
to examine whether we believe that male circumcision is justifiable
under these rubrics.  In contrast, putting a medical cloak on the
procedure, tends to divert the discussion away from addressing the
real basis on which it is performed, and on which it should,
therefore, be justified.

The other matter that is raised here, is one that is relevant to
many activities in our society at the moment, namely, that of
whether something is, in itself, inherently wrong, or whether it
is only wrong, if it is wrong at all, because of its consequences.
We need to discuss both such aspects of any situation that raises
ethical and legal concerns.  For instance, applying this approach
to the issue of male circumcision, we would first need to ask
whether this is inherently wrong.  As you know there are varying
views on this, as indeed, there are with respect to many other
issues about which there is a lack of consensus regarding their
morality, for example, abortion, euthanasia, genetic technology,
reproductive technology, and various uses of biotechnology.

If we decide that male circumcision is not inherently wrong (the
argument that it is inherently wrong, would be that it involves an
irreversible, unconsented to, not-therapeutic mutilation) then we
must ask: "Are its consequences such that it should be regarded as
wrong?".  This, of course, is also open to debate, and what counts
as harms, risks, benefits and potential benefits can be quite broad
and again subject to disagreement.  For instance, apart from any
health advantages, arguments in favour of male circumcision would
include respect for cultural identity, tradition, ritual, custom,
religious affiliation and belief, identification with a father who
is circumcised, etc..  The harms and risks are those that the
persons who are against male circumcision point out, in particular,
health harms and risks, loss of sensitivity, future psychological
and sexual problems, and the potential for increased pain sensitivity
because of this intervention--in my view, a very important concern.

There is also an issue of burden of proof.  In my opinion, those
wishing to carry out circumcision would have the burden of proving
that this is justified.  This means that where there is equal doubt
as to whether or not this is the case, the procedure could not be
undertaken.

The issues raised by male circumcision are, indeed, very complex
and I believe that there is much to be learned, and good to be
done, through seeking to deal with them in a spirit of active
tolerance and sensitivity to other person's beliefs, although these
beliefs may be contrary to one's own, while strongly advocating
one's own position and the reasons for this.  In fact, to adopt
such an approach might be the most likely way in which to have
one's position accepted.




Yours sincerely,

(signed)

Margaret A. Somerville, AM, FRSC
Gale Professor of Law,
Professor
Faculty of Medicine;
Director
McGill Centre for Medicine,
Ethics and Law
