Poland R, The Question of Routine Infant Circumcision. NE
Jour Med, Vol 3 No 18, May 3, 1990. pp. 1312-1314

An excerpt:

     "It has been proposed that circumcision may protect men
from infection with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
Two recent reports concluded that uncircumcised men exposed
to HIV during heterosexual intercounres appeared to be more
susceptible to infection.  The presence of a penile ulcer
was found to be as important, or more important, as a risk
factor, for seroconversion.  The data were collected in a
clinic for venereal  disease in Kenya, where the
heterosexual trasmission of HIV appears to be more prevalent
than in North America.  In these studies, the uncircumcised
mencame from areas of the country un whih HIV was endemic,
and the circumcised men came from areas of lower risk.
Whichi is cause and which is effect remains unknown.  Many
of the studies' conclusions depended on retrospective data,
and again, important sources of bias may have obscured the
true contribution to the risk of the transmission of HIV.
WE MUST REMEMBER THAT CIRCUMCISION IS NOT PERFORMED
RANDOMLY; (Emphasis added) it is more common in certain
socioeconomic, ethnic and religious groups.  Jews and
Muslims are circumcised for religious reasons.  In the
United States, neonatal circumcision is less common among
the poor and among Hispanic Americans.  In Japan and Sweden,
neonatal circumcision is not performed routinely.  These
demographic factors may in turn be associated with sexual
practices and exposures that have a significant effect on
the incidence of HIv infection.  Nevertheless, the studies
cited do suggest that HIV may be more infectious during
heterosexual intercoures if the male partner is
uncircumcised and has a mucosal or cutaneous ulcer.  In
preventing the transmission of HIV, however, circumcision is
unlikely to be as effective as limiting the number of sexual
contacts or using condoms properly."
------------------------------------------------------------
de Vincenzi I, Mertens T., Male Circumcision: a role in HIV
prevention?, AIDS Vol 8 No 2, February 1994, pp.153-160

"Conclusion:

     The potential public-health benefits of male
circumcision have been greatly discussed in the past 50
years, often in a passionate and emotional manner.  However,
relatively few studies have been carried out and those that
have, present conflicting results.  The major criticism of
most of the studies performed to date is the lack of
confounding factors, which could be related to both
circumcision status and risk of sexually transmitted
infections, such as sexual behaviour or different hygienic
practices or differential use of health facilites.  As
Poland noted, 'We must remember that circumcision is not
performed randomly.'

     "Therefore, further efforts are still required to
quantify the relative risk associated with the lack of male
circumcision.  Some of this can be achieved by using
observational designs which better address the limitations
discussed above.  Laboratory and primate research might
continue to provide useful information.

     "As the safety, expected benefits, feasibility and
acceptablity of mass circumcision are all questionable,
neither public-health interventions nor intervention studies
appear to be defensible options before there is stornger
evidence from observational studies in differnet settings
that show lack of male circumcision may be a genuinely
independent risk factor for the transmission of HIV."
-----------------------------------------------------------
Krantz I, Ahlberg BM. Circumcision and HIV Letter, Lancet
Vol 345, March 18, 1995, p. 730

     Sir-According to several workers, (1,2) absence of male
circumcision increases the probability of transmission of
HIV.  The quantification of the potential prevention benefit
from male circumcision is highly problematic. (3)  The
strength of the association, when present, varies greatly
between studies.  Despite inconsistency, published finding
seem to have resulted in some consensus that male
circumcision should be promoted as an HIV preventative
intervention, especially in African countries (4).  What
seems to be of little concern to advocates of circumcision
is the meaning and practices associated with it.  The
studies so far, which mainly used case control designs, have
not made preper allowances for possbile extraeous factors
such that may have effceted the relation examined. Nobody is
circumcised at random.  The researchers cannot refer to high
correlation coefficients and rely on regression models as
controls for possible confounding factors; first they have
to be cultura
lly competent to understand which factors determine whether
you are circumcised or not as a young boy.

     Among the Kikuyu in Kenya, before the colonial and
Christian missionary interventions at the turn of the
century, all boys and girls went though the ritual of
circumcision and clitoridectomy, respectively.  Circumcision
was associated with acquirement of social status for the
initates and their parents. (5)  Just before the operation,
the parents of the would be male initiate identifed a person
who was responsible and knowledgeable to act as "mutiri".
The mutiri was supposed to advise and prepare the boy for
initiation, take him through the operation by physically
supproting him, take care of the wound, and guide him
afterwards.  Part of the education was hawe to relate to
women and how to maintain discipline in sexual matters.

     According to our experince from central Kenya, almost
all boys aged 12-15 years undergo circumcision in clinics
before they start secondary school.  Apart from the academic
qualification, there is eveidently a demand for social
adulthood defined through circumcision.  However although
the operation marks entry into adulthood as it was known
traditionally, its form and organisation have changed.
Unlike in the past almost no ceromonial preparations are
made and the adults and the community in general are not
involved in the associated education.  Parents no longer
have the important role of identifying the mutiri.  The link
between youth and adults no longer exists.  At the age and
season for initiation the youths turn to their peers and
usually choose somone to be mutiri who went though the
initiation in the previous season.  In the youth subculture
the only part of the educational message is that, as proof
of manhood, sexual intercourse must take follow soon after circumcision.
  If this takes place in the commercial sex market the
implications for acquiring sexually transmitted diseases,
HIV included are far reaching.

     The idea that circumcision should be promoted,
similiarly to condoms, as a preventative measure against HIV
colud thus be counterproductive. The link between
circumcision and protection against HIV might very well be
biologically  plausible, but the onus remains to produce
adequate evidence of safety before a supposedly protective
measure is implemented anywhere.

     [The HIV prevention project in central Kenya is
supported by Swedish Agency for Research Cooperation with
Developing Countries (SAREC).]

               *Ingela Krantz, Beth Maina Ahlberg

     *Unit of International Health Care Research (IHAR),
Department of International and Social Medicine. Department
of International Health and Social Medicine, Karolinska
Institutet,`s-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden; Nordic School of
Public Health, Goteberg; and Department of Sociology,
Uppsala University, Upsulla

1.  Cameron W, Simonsen JN, D'Costa LJ, et al. Female to
Male transmission of human immunodefienciency virus type 1:
risk factors for sero-conversion in men.  Lancet 1989; ii: 403-07

2.  Hunter DJ, Maggwa BN, Mati JK, Tukei PM, Mbugua S.
Sexual behavior, sexually transmitted diseases, male
circumcision and risk of HIV infection among women in
Nairobi. Kenya AIDS 1994; 8: 93-99

3.  de Vincenzi I Mertens T. Male circumcision: a role in
HIV prevention? AIDS 1994 8: 153-160

4.  Caldwell JC, Caldwell P. The nature and limits of the
sub-Saharan African AIDS epidemic: evidence fro geographical
and other patterns.  Health Transition working paper 19.
National Cetre for Epidemiology and Population Health,
Canberra: Health Transition Centre Publications, 1993

5.  Worthman CM, Whiting JWM. Social change in adolescent
sexual behaviour, male selection and premarital pregnancy
rates in a Kikuyu community. Ethnos 1987; 15: 145-65
----------------------------------------------------------

Grosskurth H, et al. A community trial of the impact of
improved sexually transmitted disease treatment on the HIV
epidemic in rural Tanzania: 2. Baseline survey results. AIDS
Vol 9 No 8 Augst 1995 pp. 927-934

Some excerpts:

     "Among men, HIV prevalence was significantly higher
among those who had been circumcised."

     "On univariate analysis, circumcised men were at
significantly higer risk than uncircumcised men of the same
age and living in the same community (OR, 154; P=0.03). . .
The reasons for the apparent lack of a protective effect of
circumcision in this population are not clear.  It may be
that circumcised men in Mwanza Region live a more modern
lifestyle, and are at increased risk due to behavioural
factors that were not measured in this survey.  Circumcision
is known to be more common in uban areas, and among certain
ethnic groups originating from other areas who therefore
tend to travel more often.  Further research is being
conducted to answer this question."


