From Young, Hugh "Safe-sex Guidelines: 
Defining Risk for Gay Men and Other Men Who Have Sex With Men" 
for the New Zealand AIDS Foundation, March 1995:
...
In a review of the literature, de Vincenzi and Mertens 
concluded that "...lack of distinction between susceptibility 
and infectivity, inadequate control for confounding variables, 
potential selection bias and misclassification of exposure, 
inappropriate choice of a comparison group, and publication 
bias, may lead to under- or overestimation of the association 
[between circumcision and HIV status]. It is difficult to 
predict the net effect of these sources of bias. Furthermore, 
the magnitude of the association varies strongly between 
studies and its crude measure is overestimated in some reports."

Another meta-analysis, by Moses et. al (1993) concluded "A 
considerable body of evidence exists, though not completely 
consistent, linking non-circumcision in men to increased risk 
of HIV." 
... 
Kreiss et al. questioned 316 HIV seropositive and 
186 HIV seronegative men and found (after correcting for race, 
history of IV drug use and history of syphilis) that "among 
uncircumcised men, the proportion of HIV risk attributable to 
uncircumcised status was 50%" That is, that other things being 
equal an uncircumcised man is *twice* as likely as a 
circumcised man to contract HIV. A later publication (Kreiss 
1993) based on the same data is more specific, adding "in this 
study" and "in Seattle".

Being uncircumcised can have no direct effect on the risk of 
any practices except insertive penetration, being docked (and 
to a much lesser extent, docking) or mutual masturbation using 
cum as a lubricant, but the only practice subjects were asked 
about was receptive anal sex. Kreiss says (personal 
communication) that this finding is paradoxical. A correlation 
between uncircumcision and syphilis suggests one possible 
indirect connection, and the presence of CD4 receptor cells in 
the foreskins of rhesus macaques, another. A correlation was 
also found between being circumcised and IV drug use. This was 
not discussed. 

However, the subjects' (un)circumcision status was determined 
by asking, though the small number of men described as 
uncircumcised (77, 59 of them HIV seropositive and only 18 
HIV  seronegative) meant a small number of incorrect reports 
could significantly change the outcome. Three men's statuses 
were not recorded.

Surick et al (cited in Vincenzi (1994)) found that 17.7% of 
uncircumcised men and 8.4% of circumcised men misclassified 
themselves, throwing serious doubt on any study relying on 
self-reporting, especially where the number of men in either 
category is small.

Kreiss et al.  assume that men choose their sexual partners 
regardless of their circumcision status. The existence of 
magazines and clubs for uncircumcised men indicates that this 
is not so.

These uncertainties cast serious doubt on the conclusion that 
"The potential impact of circumcision as an intervention 
strategy to reduce both homosexual and heterosexual 
transmission of HIV could be significant and warrants further 
evaluation." - Kreiss (1993) (The conclusion was more 
emphatic in Kreiss (1992)). The potential impact of penotomy 
would be even more significant. The human rights affront of 
neonatal male circumcision differs greatly in degree, but not 
in kind, from that of female genital mutilation. Debate on 
this issue (Fink (1987) et seq.) is contentious and emotional 
(men are naturally attached to their foreskins....), and seems 
to be to some extent a reawakening of age-old issues around 
circumcision that have little to do with health or hygiene.

The value of meta-analyses is open to question where so much 
emotional freight is carried: the average of a number of 
flawed studies will also be flawed. 
... 
Fink, Aaron J. (1987) 
letter to the New England Journal of Medicine and answers from 
J G Swadey, R W Enzenauer and J K Oakes. July 11. 316(24) 
1545-1547

Kreiss, Joan and Hopkins S. (1992) The association between 
circumcision status and HIV infection among homosexual men. 
VIIIth International AIDS Conference, Amsterdam (Abstract PoC 
4091)

Kreiss, Joan and Hopkins S. (1993) The association between 
circumcision status and HIV infection among homosexual men. J. 
Infections Diseases 168:1404-8

Moses et al. (1993) Male Circumcision and risk for HIV 
infection; A Review of Epidemiological Studies Conducted to 
Date. IX International Conference on AIDS, Berlin (Abstract 
PO-C!!-2838) (I'm not sure if that abstract number is to be 
believed)

de Vincenzi, I, and Thierry Mertens (1994) Male circumcision: 
a role in HIV prevention? AIDS 8: 153-160 
