NOCIRC North Carolina -- PRESS RELEASE
March 1, 1999

AAP DOES NOT RECOMMEND ROUTINE INFANT CIRCUMCISION

Children's health advocates lauded the American Academy of Pediatrics
(AAP) today for its refusal to recommend infant circumcision.  The
AAP policy has now come in line with all of the other medical
societies' circumcision policy statements in the English speaking
world.  This position underscores the idea -- widely accepted around
the world -- that circumcision does not specifically contribute to
children's health in any way.  In countries that do not circumcise,
including all of continental Europe, urological health appears to
be as good as, or better, than in the United States.

While the AAP was negligent in its omission of the many health
benefits of the intact penis in the March 1999 Circumcision Position
Statement, they did show integrity by refusing to concede to a
medical lobby that seeks to profit from this unnecessary surgery
on children.  Circumcision of infants consumes over 500 million
national health-care dollars a year in unnecessary surgery.  An
unusually high percentage of these surgeries, 2%-15%, have notable
complications, primarily hemorrhaging and infection.  Although
rare, death has occurred on several occasions.  The most recently
reported circumcision death occurred in Cleveland, Ohio on October
16, 1998, when three-week-old baby Dustin Evans Jr., died from
complications related to his circumcision repair.

An increasing number of physicians and other health professionals
have called for an end to the social practice of circumcising
American boys.  As such, the rate of infant circumcision has fallen
steadily in the United States from over 90% to 60% during the last
30 years.  It is generally expected that the United States will
soon join the rest of the medically advanced world in rejecting
circumcision altogether.

For the first time in the AAP's history, the AAP's new position
statement also acknowledges the extreme trauma and pain suffered
by infants during circumcision.  The AAP states that it is "essential
that pain relief be provided" during circumcision.  A recent study
showed that only 25% of obstetricians, the physicians most likely
to perform infant circumcisions, are willing to use anesthesia.
The AAP was derelict, however, in recommending a topical analgesia,
EMLA, for pain relief, since it's tested effectiveness is extremely
poor during circumcisions and it's manufacturer, Astra, warns
strongly against its use on infants less than 6 months of age,
citing risk of toxic methemoglobinemia.

NOCIRC of North Carolina does seriously question, however, why the
AAP attempts to legally validate a non-medical surgery in their
new statement.  The AAP states that "it is legitimate for parents
to take into account cultural, religious and ethnic traditions"
when deciding on circumcision, yet the AAP's position on female
circumcision makes clear that non-medical, non- prophylactic surgery
is unethical, regardless of personal or traditional values.  The
AAP has now officially recognized that both male and female
circumcision is not medically indicated and does not provide any
significant prophylactic benefits.  While the AAP places the rights
of the female child to bodily integrity above cultural and religious
factors, the AAP unfortunately fails to bestow male children with
these same rights to bodily integrity.

NOCIRC of North Carolina is the North Carolina State Chapter of
the National Organization of Circumcision Information Resource
Centers (NOCIRC), a nonprofit health educational organization that
presents the medical community and the general public with the
latest documented medical evidence on male circumcision.
