"THE ANIMAL KINGDOM WOULD PROBABLY CEASE TO EXIST
 WITHOUT SMEGMA"


      "Also, with poor hygiene, a foul-smelling, cheesey,
white secretion called smegma can accumulate under the
foreskin. Research has shown that smegma may be a cancer-
causing agent. Therefore, when your son grows up, there may be
a decreased risk of cancer of the cervix in his sexual
partners if he has been circumcised." 
      (The American Medical Association Family Medical Guide,
Third Edition. "Revised, updated" / "Physicians dedicated to
the health of America" / Charles B. Clayman, MD, Medical
editor, Random House, 1994) 

[The publication date -- 1994 -- given for the book above is
not a misprint.]


     "Infant Smegma: Skin cells from the glans of the penis
and the inner foreskin are shed throughout life. This is
especially true in childhood; natural skin shedding serves to
separate the foreskin from the glans. Since this shedding
takes place in a relatively closed space -- with the foreskin
covering the glans -- the shed skin cells cannot escape in the
usual manner. They escape by working their way to the tip of
the foreskin. These escaping discarded skin cells constitute
infant smegma.
      "Adult Smegma: Specialized sebaceous glans -- Tyson's
Glands -- which are located on the glans under the foreskin,
are largely inactive in childhood. At puberty, Tyson's Glands
produce an oily substance, which when mixed with shed skin
cells, constitute adult smegma. Adult smegma serves as a
protective, lubricating function for the glans." 
      (Care of the Uncircumcised Penis, American Academy of
Pediatrics, 1984) 
 
      "An infant's glans is very delicate and can be seriously
irritated by urine. The foreskin acts as a cover for the glans
and produces smegma for a protective coating." (p. 55)
      "As to smegma, the normal secretion produced under the
foreskin, Gairdner claimed that this substance protects the
glans. This is particularly important if wet diapers are left
on too long, since decomposition of the urine can cause
irritation of the glans if it is not coated with smegma." 
(p. 64) 
      ". . . there is not a shred of evidence to support to
theory that smegma is carcinogenic." (p. 91) 
      "All animals produce smegma, and none is circumcised.
When mammals reproduce, smegma is deposited. If smegma
contained a carcinogen or even an irritant, then the
propagation of the species would be jeopardized. No such
phenomenon exists." (p. 106) 
      (Circumcision: An American Health Fallacy, by Edward
Wallerstein, Springer Publishing Co., 1980)

      "Smegma is probably the most maligned body substance. It
is definitely not a carcinogen (cancer causing). . . . It is
no more harmful than other substances like ear wax . . .
smegma in either sex performs a positive, not a negative
function."
      (When Your Baby Boy Is Not Circumcised, by Edward
Wallerstein, Pennypress, Inc. [1100 23rd Ave., Seattle, WA
98112], 1982) 

      "Several researchers have tried to prove that smegma
causes cancer; all have failed. Not only is smegma not
harmful, it is actually beneficial, serving as a protective
coating and lubricant for the glans."
      (The Circumcision Decision, by Edward Wallerstein,
Pennypress, Inc., 1980) 

      "This process of rationalization has culminated in the
supposed relationship between the husband's foreskin and
cancer of the genitals--one of the greatest hoaxes in the
history of medicine. The theory is that the uncircumcised
penis, because it may generate a waxy substance called smegma,
can produce cancer of the penis and cancer of the cervix (neck
of the womb).
      ". . . Further evidence that circumcision is not linked
with cancer comes from tests of human smegma. In 1942, the
National Cancer Institute conducted careful experiments and
found that smegma had no carcinogenic effect whatsoever. This
test was duplicated in 1963 on a more extensive scale by Dr.
D. G. Reddy and others, with the same conclusions. Negative
results have also been obtained in a number of other
experiments ("Circumcision in Infancy," Charles Weiss, M.D.,
Clinical Pediatrics, 1964)."
      ("The Unkindest Cut of All," by John M. Foley, MD, Fact,
July 1966)

      "If allowed to accumulate for several years, smegma
might possibly cause some irritation. But, even this is
doubtful." 
      (Modern Sex Techniques, by Robert Street, Lancer Books,
NY, 1959, p. 154) 
 
      "Smegma has been much maligned and completely
misunderstood by most people. It has several exceedingly
crucial functions: by accumulation starting at the coronal
sulcus, it dissects the normally adherent newborn's prepuce
away from the glans; it prevents re-adherence of the prepuce
to the glans; and throughout life it provides sebaceous-like
lubricant to the entire glans and inner aspect of the prepuce,
which keeps the glans smooth, soft and sensitive. . . . The
animal kingdom would probably cease to exist without smegma."
      (Manuscript of Say No to Circumcision! 40 Compelling
Reasons Why You Should Respect His Birthright and Keep Your
Son Whole, by Thomas J. Ritter, MD, 1986, pp. 130-131) 


[This document, formatted here as an ASCII text file, is from
Deeper Into Circumcision: An Invitation to Awareness, by John
A. Erickson.]
