Sexology (New York), Vol 37, no. 2 (September 1970) pp. 50-53

                   HOW SMEGMA SERVES THE PENIS

                      by Joyce Wright, M. D.

      NATURE'S ASSURANCE THAT THE UNCIRCUMCISED GLANS PENIS
          WILL FUNCTION SMOOTHLY IS PROVIDED BY SMEGMA

     Is Smegma useful?  Yes, certainly.  It lubricates the cavity
between the foreskin of the penis and the glans, thus allowing
smooth movement between them during intercourse.

     During an erection, the glans increases in size.  The
foreskin, on the other hand does not change its dimensions.  It
is yielding enough and thin enough to accept the enlarged glans.
Furthermore, the foreskin is pressed backward during intercourse,
and on subsidence of erection returns to its normal position.

     These movements are not entirely passive but are aided by
the relaxation of the muscle fibers within the foreskin.

     But could these movements be comfortably performed if the
surfaces between glans and foreskin were dry and harsh? Of course
not.  There would be difficulty, delay, need fro manipulation.
Nature has therefore provided a "natural ointment," smegma to
ensure easy lubrication and protect this delicate region of the
male genital organ.

     To secure its even distribution, smegma is formed from the
whole inner surface of the foreskin cavity.  Recently, Soviet
researchers at the Botkin's Hospital in Moscow have discovered
important details of this process.

     Smegma production, they find, is concentrated in the cells
of innumerable small prominences, minute microscopic protrusions
of various shapes and sizes found on the inner surface of the
foreskin cavity.

     The process is a continuous one: living cells are constantly
growing toward the surface, only to undergo fatty degeneration in
their turn and separate off as freshly formed smegma.

     These smegma-forming prominences vary with the age of the
individual.  The prominences may be present in fair numbers, even
in infants and young children, but they reach their largest size
and greatest number in men between ages 20 and 40.  Thereafter,
the smegma-forming prominences regress until, in elderly men,
they can be detected only in an atrophied form.

     These findings tally with the amount of smegma produced at
various ages.  Comparatively little is formed in childhood.  A
noticeable increase occurs during adolescence, with its great
acceleration of penis growth.

     This is understandable because the penis is developing into
its mature and adult form.  Smegma is needed for the smooth
operation of erection particularly during adolescence when sexual
thoughts and dreams, nocturnal erections, and masturbation are common.

     The adult stage follows with its period of maximal sexual
activity.  Sexual intercourse becomes a regular feature of life
and the function of smegma for lubrication assumes its full
value.  Middle age follows with a decline in amount until there
is a virtual absence of the substance in old age.

     These findings are, of course, subject to individual
differences; in some men, the penis remains well preserved and
functional even into extreme old age.

     Does smegma also contain sebum, the natural oil produced by
the sebaceous glands or ordinary skin?  This question has been
debated for mary years but Soviet researchers have at last
supplied the answer.

     They find that in childhood  sebaceous glands are in fact
present in the inner surface of the foreskin.  As age advances,
these glands decrease in number and in adult life occur only at
the base of the foreskin, inconstantly and sparsely.

     Other researchers have found them in rather large numbers in
some individuals.  But in general, it is now clear that while
sebum forms an essential part of smegma in childhood it makes no
significant contribution to it in later life.

     Attention has also been directed to certain papules present
in some men on the corona of the glans.  Recently naming them
"pearly penile papules" - or P-3, for short - an American
physician considers they are probably more common than in
generally realized.  They rarely cause trouble and, since they
consist only of a network of blood vessels surrounded by
connective tissue, they take no part in smegma production.

     Smegma is a substance of considerable chemical complexity,
but little is known of its exact composition beyond the fact that
it contains neutral fats, fatty acids, sterols; other lipids and
cell debris.

     Scientific investigation is difficult because on exposure
smegma readily undergoes changes in chemical composition and
physical consistancy.; it can differ in color from yellow to
white and may vary between individuals at different stages of life.

     It also varies in amount in relation to the so-called
"smegma producing capacity" of the foreskin cavity.  In other
words, a long or wide foreskin produces more smegma than a short
or narrow one.  This is to be expected since the function of
smegma is to produce a uniform general lubrication between
foreskin and glans.

     How do these matters affect American men?  Circumcision in
infancy is a near routine procedure in the United States.  Hence,
as an American doctor recently stated, "the uncircumcised male .
. . is becoming a rarity in our society."  One must suppose then
that most men would lack smegma though an absence of foreskin.
[Editor's note:  This paragraph which was published in September
1970 is outmoded.  In 1971, the American Academy of Pediatrics
stated, "there are no valid medical reasons for circumcision in
the neonatal period.   In 1989, the AAP amplified this by
stating, "It (circumcision) is an elective procedure to be
performed only if the infant is stable and healthy."  In 1995,
the AAP said, "A patients reluctance or refusal to assent should
also carry considerable weight when the proposed intervention is
not essential to his or her welfare and/or can be deferred
without substantial risks."  In addition, parents are becoming
more aware of the negative consequences of circumcision.  All of
this has contributed to the rapid decline of infant circumcision
in America.  The US government reported that the intact rate for
1993 had climbed to more than 40%]

     This will be true for those whose circumcision is complete.
However the operation is by no means an "all-or-none" procedure.
Surveys have shown that as many as one-third of circumcised men
are left with a portion of foreskin that partially covers the glans.

     Adding to their number those individuals who have never been
circumcised, we find a sizeable portion of men are still in
possession of foreskins.  Hence, from the practical point of
view, it is important that they should realize the need for
cleanliness of the foreskin cavity.  This means, in effect
keeping it free from an undesirable collection of smegma.

     In its fresh state, smegma is a wholesome and functional
lubricant.  But, if allowed to accumulate in the foreskin cavity,
it becomes changed into an unpleasant, unhealthy, and
bad-smelling substance.

     Such changes are due to chemical splitting of smegma fats
and the action of skin germs, which are otherwise harmless.  In
addition, foreign material may gain access to the smegma deposit
in the form of dirt, dust or sand, and urine and semen.

     Normally, a healthy foreskin can be retracted for cleansing
and smegma can be removed by washing.  The fact that it is a
superficial substance renders its removal easy, provided
cleansing is performed with regularity.  Particular attention
should be given to the depths of the foreskin where smegma is
liable to lodge in the pocket between foreskin and glans.

     To these must be added phimosis, or narrowing of the
foreskin opening at its free end, which in extreme cases, becomes
converted to a hard and rigid ring.

     These are conditions that require medical attention.  This
is necessary in order to regain genital health and restore
enjoyable sexual relations, which though foreskin discomfort, may
have become a source of unhappiness.

     Without correct treatment, ill health of the foreskin is
liable to worsen - formation of smegma continues and, without
outlet or access for cleaning, deposits collect and harden within
the foreskin cavity.  Such compact masses of smegma can lead to
chronic disease, and even prepare the way for cancerous changes.

     Cancer of the penis is not common in the United States but
is frequent in certain tropical countries.  It is almost always
associated with uncleanliness and longstanding ill health of the
penis.  Usually a preceeding phimosis is present.  Since the
tumor commonly develops with such a closed foreskin cavity, it
has been considered  that retained smegma could be the
cancer-inducing agent.  [Editor's note:  Cancer of the penis is
now known to be associated with the presence of the human
papilloma virus (HPV).  Cancer of the penis may occur in both
circumcised and uncircumcised men if HPV is present.  Additional
risk factors are hygiene, genital warts, and number of sexual
partners.  Smegma is not now believed to be carcinogenic.]

     Nevertheless, experimental investigation of this so-called
"smegma theory of genital cancer" has had little direct bearing
on cancer in the male sex.  Rather, it has been concerned with
the causation of cervical carcinoma in in women. (cancer of the
neck of the womb.)  This might be conceivably be induced by
smegma transferred to the vagina by the male during sexual intercourse.

     Such research is beset with difficulties.  In the first
place, distinction must be made between normal smegma and
accumulated smegma, which has undergone a variety of changes in
the warmth of the foreskin cavity.  Hence, any potential
cancer-inducing property could well lie in products formed by
chemical breakdown or bacterial action rather than in smegma itself.

     A further problem arises in collection of fresh smegma in
sufficient amount for experimental research.  For this reason
some workers have used smegma from horses because these animals
produce it is large amounts.  But despite repeated inoculations
of horse smegma into the vaginas of laboratory animals, the
results have been conflicting with regard to its inducing
malignant disease.

     Clearly a number of factors ore involved in the causation of
malignant disease of the genital organs.  Whether smegma does or
does not play a part will be known only when the causes of
cancerous changes in general become clear.  [Editor:  It is now
clear that smegma is not a carcinogen.]

     Meanwhile, personal hygiene and care of the penis rank high
as a protection against chronic disease.  Remember that it is
stale and accumulated smegma that is a source of ill health for
the penis.  Freshly formed smegma, washed away regularly and
constantly replenishing itself, is a wholesome lubricant - making
for ease in erection and smoothness in sexual intercourse.
------------------------------------------------
Dr. Wright has done research on infectious diseases for many
schools and institutes in the U. S. and Great Britain and was a
regular contributor to Family Doctor, a health magazine published
by the British Medical Association.


