From: BarryBE@AOL.com
Date: Sun, 16 Jun 1996 19:58:04 -0400
Message-ID: <960616195804_136272319@emout07.mail.aol.com>
To: fgm-l@bitsy.hollyfeld.org, Karen.E.Kun-1@tc.umn.edu
Subject: requested information
Sender: owner-fgm-l@hollyfeld.org
Precedence: bulk
reply-to: fgm-l@bitsy.hollyfeld.org

Karen E. Kun recently cited Moses' review of published studies on a
relationship between circumcision status and HIV transmission, and requested
further information on the subject, and on any medical associations that have
criticized routine male circumcision.

Moses et al. developed their original conclusions from geographical data
without examining a single patient  (Moses S, Bradley JE, Nagelkerke NJ,
Ronald AR, Ndinya Achola JO, Plummer FA. Geographical patterns of male
circumcision practices in Africa: association with HIV seroprevalence. Int J
Epidemiol 1990; 19: 693-7.).  They failed to confirm circumcision status or
to take recognized factors such as age of first coitus, chastity, and
monogamy into account.  This is obviously a grave oversight, as circumcision
status is often misreported, and sexual prectices have a great bearing on HIV
transmission.

Of the ten studies to date that are not marred by serious methodological
flaws, only three found an association of HIV transmission with uncircumcised
status, while five found no connection, and two found higher levels of HIV
transmission among circumcised men.  In an independent review of studies on
the relationship between circumcision status and HIV transmission, Isabelle
de Vincenzi and Thierry Mertens, (of the European Centre for the
Epidemiological Monitoring of AIDS, and The London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine), concluded that "relatively few studies have been carried
out and those that have present conflicting results. The major criticism of
most of the studies performed to date is the lack of attention given to
potential confounding factors which could be related to both circumcision
status and risk of sexually transmitted infections such as sexual behavior or
differences in hygienic practices or differential use of specific health
facilities ... Neither public health interventions nor intervention studies
appear to be defensible options before there is stronger evidence from
observational studies in different settings that show lack of male
circumcision may be a genuinely independent risk factor for the transmission
of HIV."  (Male circumcision: a role in HIV prevention?, Isabelle de Vincenzi
and Thierry Mertens, AIDS 1994, 8:153160)

In an excellent example of self-promotion in the world of academic medicine,
Moses later led  a review of the literature on the subject (Moses S, Plummer
FA, Bradley JE, Ndinya-Achola JO, Nagelkerke NJ, Ronald AR. The association
between lack of male circumcision and risk for HIV infection: a review of the
epidemiological data. Sex Transm Dis 1994; 21: 201-10.) in which each of the
authors were part of at least one of the studies  reviewed that claimed a
positive connection between circumcision and HIV status.  Not surprisingly,
they  confirm their own conclusions, and then go on to suggest that
consideration be given to male circumcision as an intervention to reduce HIV
transmission.  Dr. Frank Plummer, who co-authored both papers with Moses, has
claimed that "Male circumcision, if it could be universally implemented,
would be a very effective [AIDS] prevention." (Scientists Discover
Circumcision is Key:  AIDS Clues Turn Tide, Winnipeg Free Press 7/23/95) 

The promotion of circumcision as an AIDS prevention strategy defies common
sense.  American men in the age groups hit hardest by AIDS are about 90%
circumcised.  Disseminating the notion that circumcision confers protection
from AIDS is likely to lead the public to forego recognized methods of HIV
prevention, such as condom use, with potentially disastrous effects.

That American medical associations such as ACOG (Gynecology,) AAP
(Pediatrics,) and the AMA (American Medical Association), have condemned FGM
while waffling on male circumcision is no surprise, since their members
perform most of the one million infant male circumcisions done in the United
States every year.  Selections from The Canadian Peadiatric Society's
position statement follows:

"There is no medical indication [justification] for circumcision during the
neonatal period....The more immediate hazards of circumcision include
infection, which may be minor, or which could lead to gangrene or, general
sepsis, severe haemorrhage, mutilative deformity of, the penis, or rarely, a
procedural misadventure requiring, partial amputation of the penis....Later
complications include the excoriation of the exposed edges of the glans from
a diaper dermatitis, or a similar lesion at the urethral meatus, resulting in
stenosis in some cases.  The narrowed passage may produce obstructive
uropathy and its more serious consequences...There seems to be little basis
for prescribing routine circumcision because of a fear of cancer of the
uncircumcised prepuce developing in a septuagenerian.  It is an infrequently
encountered lesion, easy to detect and unlikely to spread.  This remote
possibility of a curable condition of very old age stands in sharp contrast
to the established hazards of neonatal circumcision...The claim that
circumcision is associated with a reduced prevalence of venereal diseases
[including HIV] in the adult male, or a decreased frequency of cervical
carcinoma in the sexual partner, has not been established as a
cause-and-effect relationship...Although the desire for conformity has
sometimes influenced a parent's or doctor's decision, intended to ensure that
the newborn infant in question will grow up to have genital resemblance with
his father and brothers, any important conformity must now be considered in
relation with the peer group in a society with a rapidly diminishing demand
for circumcision...If paediatricians are showing leadership in curtailing the
numbers of mutilative operations of questionable benefit, it is likely that
uninformed parents may turn to their family physician or obstetrician to
perpetuate such an obsolete operation. Therefore, discussion of this subject
should be encouraged among all who may deal with parents, both among the
medical and nursing professions...In the search for ways in which to stem the
rising cost of health care, the removal of such an unnecessary procedure as a
routine practice can be calculated as a major saving in terms of direct
charges - professional fees, nut-sing and other hospital services and
supplies, and sometimes the length of hospital stay - and secondary costs
resulting from any recognized clinical complications."

A blind reliance on medical opinion, which is often contradictory and
divided, is unwarranted in evaluating male circumcision.  Over the past
century, circumcision has been promoted by American doctors as a cure for
tuberculoses (S.G.A. Brown, MD, "A Plea for Circumcision,"  Medical World
  1897;15:124-125; Editor, Medical Record.  "Circumscisus,"  Medical Record,
 1896;49:430), epilepsy (Steele,  MD. "Importance of Circumcision,"  Medical
World,1902;20:518-519; Abraham L. Wolbarst, MD.  "Universal Circumcision,"
 Journal of the American Medical Association,"  1914;62:92-97), and paralysis
(Charles E. Fisher, MD.  "Circumcision,"  A Hand-Book On The Diseases of
Children And Their Homeopathic Treatment."  Chicago:  Medical Century Co.
 1895.   875; Steele,  MD. "Importance of Circumcision,"  Medical
World,1902;20:518-519).  Many of the same doctors who promoted circumcision
also endorsed and performed clitoradectomies with similar justifications.  


