John Rennie, Editor-in-Chief
Scientific American Inc
415 Madison Avenue
New York, New York
10017-1111

February 19, 1996

RE:  Caldwell JC.  Caldwell P.  The African AIDS Epidemic.  Scientific
American (March 1996): 62-68.

To the Editor:

The Caldwell's survey of the literature on the African AIDS Epidemic ignores
several key studies. De Vincenzi and Mertens of the World Health Organization
reviewed 23 studies that suggest that male circumcision may be an associative
factor for HIV infection in Africa.  They conclude that the methodological
errors in these studies preclude any conclusions about the alleged efficacy
of male circumcision.

A recent study by Grosskurth, et al. of the London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine found that circumcision had no effect on HIV infection.  It
is instructive to note that the idea that male circumcision could prevent HIV
infection was invented in 1987 by an American circumcisionist who hoped to
influence the American debate over circumcision.  The studies which later
attempted to prove this hypothesis using African villagers and prostitutes as
subjects are also by North Americans who have strong cultural and religious
biases in favor of male circumcision.  The very notion of considering
circumcision as a factor in the first place reflects this bias.  Australia
too has had a history of infant male circumcision.  Could the Caldwell's bias
evinced by their exclusion of contradictory data be a reflection of this
unfortunate history?

The Caldwells seriously misrepresent the 1952 study by Asin.  Asin did not
conclude that chancroid was less prevalent in circumcised soldiers because
they were circumcised, nor did he conclude that the intact penis is harder to
clean.  That 4% of the 1,402 soldiers studied (71% of whom were Black) were
circumcised merely reflects the circumcision rate among adult Americans at
that time.  The statement that 33% of U.S. soldiers in Korea were intact is
false and found nowhere in the medical literature.

Researcher bias is a serious problem in any study or survey. In Africa, male
circumcision and female circumcision occur in the same communities.  An
African or Moslem researcher with a bias in favor of female circumcision
could just as easily use the maps presented by the Caldwell's to suggest that
it is female circumcision that protects against HIV.  Amputating parts of the
reproductive organs of either sex will not prevent venereal infections.  Only
education will accomplish this goal.



Paul M. Fleiss, MD, MPH



Frederick Hodges



References
de Vincenzi I.  Mertens T.  Male circumcision:  a role in HIV prevention?
 AIDS 1994;8:153-160.

Grosskurth H.  Mosha F.  Todd J. et al.  A community traial of the impact of
improfed sexually transmitted disease treatment on the HIV epidemic in rural
Tanzania:  2. Baseline survey results.  AIDS 1995;9:927-934.

Asin J.  Chancroid:  A report of 1,402 cases. American Journal of Syphilis,
Gonorrhea, and Verereal Diseases 1952;36:482-487.



[CIRP note: Fleiss and Hodges's complete letter, as submitted for
publication, is presented here. Serious deletions were made by Scientific
American before this letter was published. The effect of these deletions,
intentional or not, was to portray Fleiss and Hodges's conclusions as
unsupported and ridiculous.

A response from Caldwell and Caldwell was also published, which repeated
the egregious errors of the original article. Of course the response failed
to address Fleiss and Hodges's key arguments---they had been deleted!]
