Grosskurth, H., Mosha, F., Todd, J., Senkoro, K., Newell, J., Klokke, A.,
Changalucha, J., West, B., Mayaud, P., and Gavyole, A. A community trial of the
impact of improved sexually transmitted disease treatment on the HIV epidemic
in rural Tanzania: 2. Baseline survey results. AIDS 9(8):927-934, 1995.
Abstract : African Medical and Research Foundation, Mwanza, Tanzania
OBJECTIVES: To determine baseline HIV prevalence in a trial of improved
sexually transmitted disease (STD) treatment, and to investigate risk factors
for HIV. To assess comparability of intervention and comparison communities
with respect to HIV/STD prevalence and risk factors. To assess adequacy of
sample size. SETTING: Twelve communities in Mwanza Region, Tanzania: one
matched pair of roadside communities, four pairs of rural communities, and one
pair of island communities. One community from each pair was randomly allocated
to receive the STD intervention following the baseline survey. METHODS:
Approximately 1000 adults aged 15-54 years were randomly sampled from each
community. Subjects were interviewed, and HIV and syphilis serology performed.
Men with a positive leucocyte esterase dipstick test on urine, or reporting a
current STD, were tested for urethral infections. RESULTS: A total of 12,534
adults were enrolled. Baseline HIV prevalences were 7.7% (roadside), 3.8%
(rural) and 1.8% (islands). Associations were observed with marital status,
injections, education, travel, history of STD and syphilis serology. Prevalence
was higher in circumcised men, but not significantly after adjusting for
confounders. Intervention and comparison communities were similar in the
prevalence of HIV (3.8 versus 4.4%), active syphilis (8.7 versus 8.2%), and
most recorded risk factors. Within-pair variability in HIV prevalence was close
to the value assumed for sample size calculations. CONCLUSIONS: The trial
cohort was successfully established. Comparability of intervention and
comparison communities at baseline was confirmed for most factors. Matching
appears to have achieved a trial of adequate sample size. The apparent lack of
a protective effect of male circumcision contrasts with other studies in Africa.
