REFERENCES

Chao, A., Bulterys, M., Musanganire, F., Habimana, P., Nawrocki, P., Taylor,
E., Dushimimana, A., and Saah, A. Risk factors associated with prevalent HIV-1
infection among pregnant women in Rwanda. National University of Rwanda-Johns
Hopkins University AIDS Research Team. Int.J.Epidemiol. 23:371-380, 1994.
Abstract : Department of Epidemiology, School of Hygiene and Public Health,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21205 This study evaluated risk factors
associated with prevalent HIV-1 infection among pregnant women in a semi-rural
but densely populated area surrounding the town of Butare in Rwanda. Overall
seroprevalence was 9.3% in 5690 pregnant women who sought antenatal care at one
of five health centres. Factors associated with higher seroprevalence of HIV-1
included history of multiple sexual partners, history of at least one sexually
transmitted disease (STD), relatively high socioeconomic status (SES), being
unmarried, young age at first pregnancy, and low gravidity. Women who had used
oral contraceptives, smoked more than one cigarette per day, whose partners
were circumcised, and had had sex to support themselves were also at higher
risk of being infected. A history of blood transfusion in the past 5 years was
not associated with HIV-1 infection. History of multiple sexual partners,
history of STD, high household income, partner circumcision, and past oral
contraceptive use remained strongly associated with HIV-1 infection even when
simultaneously controlling for other covariates. Among legally married women
who lacked sexual behaviour risk factors, history of STD, high SES, young age
at first pregnancy, and low gravidity were significantly associated with HIV-1
seroprevalence.

Grosskurth, H., Mosha, F., Todd, J., Senkoro, K., Newell, J., Klokke, A.,
Changalucha, J., West, B., Mayaud, P., and Gavyole, A. A community trial of the
impact of improved sexually transmitted disease treatment on the HIV epidemic
in rural Tanzania: 2. Baseline survey results. AIDS 9(8):927-934, 1995.
Abstract : African Medical and Research Foundation, Mwanza, Tanzania
OBJECTIVES: To determine baseline HIV prevalence in a trial of improved
sexually transmitted disease (STD) treatment, and to investigate risk factors
for HIV. To assess comparability of intervention and comparison communities
with respect to HIV/STD prevalence and risk factors. To assess adequacy of
sample size. SETTING: Twelve communities in Mwanza Region, Tanzania: one
matched pair of roadside communities, four pairs of rural communities, and one
pair of island communities. One community from each pair was randomly allocated
to receive the STD intervention following the baseline survey. METHODS:
Approximately 1000 adults aged 15-54 years were randomly sampled from each
community. Subjects were interviewed, and HIV and syphilis serology performed.
Men with a positive leucocyte esterase dipstick test on urine, or reporting a
current STD, were tested for urethral infections. RESULTS: A total of 12,534
adults were enrolled. Baseline HIV prevalences were 7.7% (roadside), 3.8%
(rural) and 1.8% (islands). Associations were observed with marital status,
injections, education, travel, history of STD and syphilis serology. Prevalence
was higher in circumcised men, but not significantly after adjusting for
confounders. Intervention and comparison communities were similar in the
prevalence of HIV (3.8 versus 4.4%), active syphilis (8.7 versus 8.2%), and
most recorded risk factors. Within-pair variability in HIV prevalence was close
to the value assumed for sample size calculations. CONCLUSIONS: The trial
cohort was successfully established. Comparability of intervention and
comparison communities at baseline was confirmed for most factors. Matching
appears to have achieved a trial of adequate sample size. The apparent lack of
a protective effect of male circumcision contrasts with other studies in Africa.

Barongo, L.R., Borgdorff, M.W., Mosha, F.F., Nicoll, A., Grosskurth, H.,
Senkoro, K.P., Newell, J.N., Changalucha, J., Klokke, A.H., and Killewo, J.Z.
The epidemiology of HIV-1 infection in urban areas, roadside settlements and
rural villages in Mwanza Region, Tanzania. AIDS 6:1521-1528, 1992.
Abstract : National Institute for Medical Research, Mwanza, Tanzania OBJECTIVE:
To determine the prevalence of HIV-1 infection and to identify the most
important risk factors for infection. DESIGN: A cross-sectional population
survey carried out in 1990 and 1991 in Mwanza Region, Tanzania. METHODS: Adults
aged 15-54 years were selected from the region (population, 2 million) by
stratified random cluster sampling: 2434 from 20 rural villages, 1157 from 20
roadside settlements and 1554 from 20 urban wards. Risk factor information was
obtained from interviews. All sera were tested for HIV-1 antibodies using
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA); sera non-negative on ELISA were also
tested by Western blot. RESULTS: The response rate was 81%. HIV-1 infection was
1.5 times more common in women than in men; 2.5% of the adult population in
rural villages, 7.3% in roadside settlements and 11.8% in town were infected.
HIV-1 infection occurred mostly in women aged 15-34 years and men aged 25-44
years. It was associated with being separated or widowed, multiple sex
partners, presence of syphilis antibodies, history of genital discharge or
genital ulcer, travel to Mwanza town, and receiving injections during the
previous 12 months, but not with male circumcision. CONCLUSION: This study
confirms that HIV-1 infection in this region in East Africa is more common in
women than in men. The results are consistent with the spread of HIV-1
infection along the main roads. There is no evidence that lack of circumcision
is a risk factor in this population.

Carael, M., Van de Perre, P.H., Lepage, P.H., Allen, S., Nsengumuremyi, F., Van
Goethem, C., Ntahorutaba, M., Nzaramba, D., and Clumeck, N. Human
immunodeficiency virus transmission among heterosexual couples in Central
Africa. AIDS 2:201-205, 1988.
Abstract : Institute for Sociology, Free University of Brussels, Belgium From
February to June 1986, 150 heterosexual couples with at least one
HIV-seropositive member were recruited in the 'Centre Hospitalier de Kigali',
Kigali, Rwanda. Of the 138 HIV-seropositive couples in whom both members were
tested, 124 (90%) were sexual unions between two antibody-positive partners,
illustrating the high efficiency of the heterosexual transmission of HIV. A
comparison of these 124 couples with 150 HIV-seronegative couples showed that,
in the husbands, seropositivity is significantly associated with sexual
contacts with prostitutes and history of sexually transmitted disease (STD)
within the past 2 years. Seropositive wives were less likely to be in their
first marriage and reported more episodes of STD than seronegative ones.
Seropositive couples were similar to seronegatives in their history of blood
transfusion, male circumcision and overall use of contraception but not in
their use of oral contraceptive pills, which was more frequent; they were more
often in polygamous unions. Discriminant analysis showed that STD, sexual
contacts with prostitutes and the number of previous unions are the most
powerful independent variables associated with the seropositivity of the
couples. Most of the risk factors for the couples were the risk factors for the
husband, suggesting that in most cases the husband acquired the HIV infection
and passed it to his wife.
