Date: 22 Feb 1996 11:22:11 GMT
From: "James 2 Ryan" <NOTES.JRYAN4@A50VM1.trg.nynex.COM>
Subject: Additional HIV references
To: gtf@math.rochester.edu
Comment: Memo - Internet 02-22-96 11:14:26


Geoffrey:

The additional 15 references follow:

Kault, D.A. Modelling AIDS reduction strategies. Int.J.Epidemiol.  24:188-197,
1995.  Abstract : Anton Breinl Centre for Tropical Health and Medicine, James
Cook University, Townsville, Queensland, Australia BACKGROUND.  Mathematical
models of the AIDS epidemic have not been able to give  accurate predictions
about the size of the epidemic because it is not  possible to obtain
sufficiently accurate measurements of the factors that  enable HIV
transmission. The uncertainties inherent in models of the AIDS  epidemic appear
to limit their relevance to epidemiologists. However, it  is shown here that
the uncertainties need not prevent models being used to  make reliable
decisions about which preventive strategy will be most  effective. METHOD. A
range of strategies are simulated in a model of the  AIDS epidemic. The
simulations are repeated as the value of what seems to  be the most important
uncertain factor, is varied. The effect of this  variation on the effectiveness
of each strategy is noted. In principle,  the process could be repeated whilst
all other uncertain factors are  varied as well. RESULTS. Although varying one
uncertain factor created  enormous variation in the size of the epidemic, it is
remarkable that for most preventive strategies the relative effectiveness of
the strategies  was barely altered. Hence for the most part the ranking of
strategies in  order of effectiveness is not affected by the area of
uncertainty explored  here. The results also highlight the potential
effectiveness not only of  general condom promotion, but also the use of
circumcision and spermicides  and general screening or targetted screening in
sexually transmitted  disease clinics. CONCLUSIONS. Epidemiological modelling
may accurately  rank the effectiveness of interventions although it may fail to
predict  the size of the epidemic.

Mbugua, G.G., Muthami, L.N., Mutura, C.W., Oogo, S.A., Waiyaki, P.G.,  Lindan,
C.P., and Hearst, N. Epidemiology of HIV infection among long  distance truck
drivers in Kenya. East.Afr.Med.J. 72(8):515-518, 1995.  Abstract : Kenya
Medical Research Institute, Nairobi, Kenya A total number  of two hundred
eighty three long distance truck drivers and their  assistants (loaders) who
ferry goods between Kenya and Zaire were included  in a cross-sectional study
between September 1991 and April 1992. Twenty  six percent of the study
subjects were seropositive for HIV-1 and none  were HIV-2 seropositive.
Countries of birth and residence were  significantly associated with HIV
infection (X2 = 23.6, P = 0.0006).  Significant associations were also found
between HIV seropositivity and  level of education from secondary school and
above (OR = 3.4, 95% C.I. =  1.01-11.55); being circumcised was more
protective, (OR = 0.38; 95% C.I. =  0.19-0.76), history of many years of
driving (X2 = 9.3, p = 0.0254) and  income (OR = 11.13, 95% C.I. = 1.35-91.95).
When a stepwise multiple  logistic regression model was fitted to all the
variables observed to be  significant in the univariate analysis, the following
risk factors  attained statistical significance: lack of circumcision (OR =
3.75);  income greater than Ksh. 2000 (OR = 7.24); being employed in long
distance  driving more than 11 years (OR = 3.98); and secondary school
education and  above (OR = 4.06, 95% C.I. = 1.18-13.98). Reference for all the
above Odds  Ratios was 1.

Bwayo, J., Plummer, F., Omari, M., Mutere, A., Moses, S., Ndinya-Achola,  J.,
Velentgas, P., and Kreiss, J. Human immunodeficiency virus infection  in
long-distance truck drivers in east Africa. Arch.Intern.Med.  154:1391-1396,
1994.  Abstract : Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Nairobi,
Kenya BACKGROUND: A cross-sectional survey was performed to determine the
seroprevalence and correlates of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)  infection
among long-distance truck drivers in Kenya. METHODS: Truck  drivers along the
Mombasa-Nairobi highway were enrolled at a roadside  research clinic. A
standardized interview and serologic evaluation for HIV  and syphilis were
conducted. RESULTS: We enrolled 970 truck drivers and  their assistants of whom
257 (27%) had HIV antibodies. In univariate  analysis, HIV infection was
correlated with older age, non-Kenyan  nationality, Christian religion, longer
duration of truck driving, travel  outside of Kenya, less frequent visits to
wives, and more frequent visits  to prostitutes. Uncircumcised status, history
of genital ulcer disease or  urethritis during the previous 5 years, and a
positive Treponema pallidum  hemagglutination assay for syphilis were each
associated with positive HIV  serostatus. Univariate correlates of
uncircumcised status included younger  age, non-Kenyan nationality, Christian
religion, travel outside of Kenya,  and less frequent visits to prostitutes.
There was a significant  association between uncircumcised status and 5-year
history of genital  ulcer disease or serologic evidence of syphilis, but not
with 5-year  history of urethritis. In multivariate analysis, HIV infection
was  independently associated with uncircumcised status (adjusted odds ratio
[OR], 4.9; 95% confidence interval [CI], 2.8 to 8.4), history of genital  ulcer
disease (adjusted OR, 2.4; 95% CI, 1.5 to 4.1), history of  urethritis
(adjusted OR, 1.8; 95% CI, 1.1 to 2.9), more frequent sex with  prostitutes
(more than once per month; adjusted OR, 1.7; 95% CI, 1.1 to  2.8), and positive
T pallidum hemagglutination assay (adjusted OR, 1.2;  95% CI, 1.0 to 1.4). The
attributable risk percentage for the association  between HIV and uncircumcised
status was 70%, and the population  attributable risk was 25%. CONCLUSIONS:
Truck drivers in east Africa are  at high risk of HIV infection. The strongest
correlates of HIV  seropositivity were uncircumcised status and history of both
ulcerative  and nonulcerative sexually transmitted diseases.
Hunter, D.J., Maggwa, B.N., Mati, J.K., Tukei, P.M., and Mbugua, S. Sexual
behavior, sexually transmitted diseases, male circumcision and risk of HIV
infection among women in Nairobi, Kenya. AIDS 8:93-99, 1994.  Abstract :
Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health,  Boston, MA 02115
OBJECTIVE: To study risk factors for HIV infection among  women in Nairobi,
Kenya, as the epidemic moves beyond high-risk groups.  DESIGN: A
cross-sectional case-control study among women attending two  peri-urban family
planning clinics. METHODS: A total of 4404 women were  enrolled after giving
written informed consent. Information on risk  factors was obtained by
interview using a structured questionnaire. Blood  was taken for HIV and
syphilis testing, and genital specimens for  gonorrhea and trichomoniasis
screening. RESULTS: Two hundred and sixteen  women (4.9%; 95% confidence
interval, 4.3-5.5) were HIV-1-positive.  Although risk of HIV was significantly
increased among unmarried women and  among women with multiple sex partners,
most seropositive women were  married and reported only a single sex partner in
the last year. Women  with a history or current evidence of sexually
transmitted disease were at  significantly increased risk; however, the
prevalence of these exposures  was low. Women whose husband or usual sex
partner was uncircumcised had a  threefold increase in risk of HIV, and this
risk was present in almost all strata of potential confounding factors. Only
5.2% of women reported ever  having used a condom. CONCLUSIONS: These data
suggest that, among women  who are not in high-risk groups, risk of HIV
infection is largely  determined by their male partner's behavior and
circumcision status.  Interventions designed to change male sexual behavior are
urgently needed.

Malamba, S.S., Wagner, H.U., Maude, G., Okongo, M., Nunn, A.J.,
Kengeya-Kayondo, J.F., and Mulder, D.W. Risk factors for HIV-1 infection  in
adults in a rural Ugandan community: a case-control study. AIDS  8:253-257,
1994.  Abstract : Medical Research Council (UK) Programme on AIDS in Uganda,
Entebbe OBJECTIVE: To study in depth sexual history and sexual behaviour
variables as risk factors for HIV-1 infection in a rural Ugandan  population.
METHODS: Following a socioeconomic and serological survey of a  rural
population in Masaka District, south-west Uganda, 233 randomly  selected
HIV-1-positive cases and 233 negative controls matched on age and  village of
residence, were invited in October 1990 to participate in a  case-control
study. A total of 132 cases and 161 controls attended for  in-depth
investigation including an interview about sexual behaviour.  RESULTS: The
factor most strongly associated with increased risk of  infection was a greater
number of lifetime sexual partners, with odds  ratios (OR) of 2.1 and 4.9 for
those reporting 4-10 and 11 or more  partners, respectively, compared with
those reporting less than four  partners. Having only one sexual partner did
not provide complete  protection, a total of seven (one male, six female)
subjects reporting  only one sexual partner were HIV-1-positive. Other
significant factors  were a history of genital ulcers [OR, 2.9; 95% confidence
intervals (CI),  1.0-9.1) and not being a Muslim (OR, 5.4; 95% CI, 1.8-16.5)
suggesting a  possible protective effect of circumcision. There was a
suggestion that  those who married within the last 7 years (OR, 2.4; 95% CI,
0.9-6.1) and  men exposed to menstrual blood (OR, 5.7; 95% CI, 0.7-49.8) were
at an  increased risk of HIV-1 infection. CONCLUSIONS: These results confirm
the  predominant role of sexual behaviour in the HIV-1 epidemic. Of particular
concern is the observation of HIV-1 infection among those reporting only one
partner. Where HIV-1 infection is widely distributed in the general
population, risk reduction strategies should, in addition to the promotion  of
partner reduction, place strong emphasis on safe-sex techniques.

Moses, S., Plummer, F.A., Bradley, J.E., Ndinya-Achola, J.O., Nagelkerke,
N.J., and Ronald, A.R. The association between lack of male circumcision  and
risk for HIV infection: a review of the epidemiological data.  Sex.Transm.Dis.
21:201-210, 1994.  Abstract : Department of Community Health, University of
Nairobi, Kenya  BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Whether male circumcision reduces
the risk of  acquiring human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection remains
controversial. STUDY DESIGN: As there have now been a number of studies
conducted that have examined this issue, we undertook to review their
findings. Thirty epidemiological studies identified in the literature that
investigated the association between male circumcision status and risk for  HIV
infection were reviewed. RESULTS: Eighteen cross-sectional studies  from six
countries reported a statistically significant association, four  studies from
four countries found a trend toward an association. Four  studies from two
countries found no association. Two prospective studies  reported significant
associations, as did two ecological studies. In  studies in which significant
associations were demonstrated, measures of  increased risk ranged from 1.5 to
8.4. The groups in which positive  associations were found included sexually
transmitted disease (STD) clinic  and hospital patients, outpatient clinic and
HIV screening clinic  attenders, long-distance truck drivers, and general
community members.  CONCLUSION: Potential sources of error, assessment of caus
ality, impli cations of the findings, and future research needs are discussed.
Because  a substantial body of evidence links noncircumcision in men with risk
for  HIV infection, consideration should be given to male circumcision as an
intervention to reduce HIV transmission.

Hunter, D.J. AIDS in sub-Saharan Africa: the epidemiology of heterosexual
transmission and the prospects for prevention. Epidemiology. 4:63-72,  1993.
Abstract : Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health,
Boston, MA 02115 As the epidemic of the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(AIDS) in sub-Saharan Africa enters its second decade, much has been  learned
about the distribution and determinants of the disease and its  causative
agent, the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Over 6 million  people, or 2.5%
of the adult population, are thought to be infected with  HIV. The distribution
of HIV is largely determined by sexual behavior; as for other sexually
transmitted diseases, the characteristics of sexual  networks determine the
extent and rate of spread of HIV. Female sex  workers and their male clients
are at high risk for HIV and have been  important in initiating the epidemic in
many African countries. The  dynamics of HIV in the rest of the population are
complex; men with  multiple sexual partners are largely responsible for
transmission of HIV  to women in the general population. Other sexually
transmitted diseases  and lack of male circumcision may increase the
probability of transmission  of HIV during sexual intercourse and probably are
partially responsible  for the rapid diffusion of HIV in Africa. Interventions
among high-risk  groups are needed, but they must be accompanied by attempts to
induce  behavior change among men and women in the general population.
Epidemiologic studies of the determinants of sexual behavior and sexual
contact patterns, as well the design and evaluation of interventions, are
urgently needed. Key areas for development are the study of behavioral
exposures and outcomes, the evaluation of interventions, developing new
methods for conducting interventions in resource-poor environments, and
increasing the number of African scientists with the skills and resources  to
conduct epidemiologic studies.
Kreiss, J.K. and Hopkins, S.G. The association between circumcision status  and
human immunodeficiency virus infection among homosexual men.  J.Infect.Dis.
168:1404-1408, 1993.  Abstract : Department of Epidemiology, University of
Washington, Seattle  To evaluate whether uncircumcised status is correlated
with acquisition of  human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), 502 homosexual men
were surveyed; 85%  were circumcised. HIV infection was significantly
associated with  uncircumcised status (odds ratio [OR], 2.2; 95% confidence
interval [CI],  1.2, 3.8), nonwhite race, intravenous drug use, sexual contact
with an  intravenous drug user, number of male partners, frequency of
unprotected  receptive anal intercourse, and with history of genital herpes,
anal  herpes, or syphilis. Uncircumcised status was significantly associated
with older age, nonwhite race, and history of syphilis; it was inversely
associated with intravenous drug use. Using logistic regression analysis,  the
adjusted OR for the association between HIV infection and  uncircumcised status
was 2.0 (95% CI, 1.0, 4.0). Uncircumcised homosexual  men had 2-fold increased
risk of HIV infection. The role of circumcision  as an intervention strategy to
reduce sexual transmission of HIV warrants  consideration.

Diallo, M.O., Ackah, A.N., Lafontaine, M.F., Doorly, R., Roux, R., Kanga,
J.M., Heroin, P., and De Cock, K.M. HIV-1 and HIV-2 infections in men
attending sexually transmitted disease clinics in Abidjan, Cote d'Ivoire.  AIDS
6:581-585, 1992.  Abstract : Projet RETRO-CI, Institut d'Hygiene, Treichville
OBJECTIVE: (1)  To determine the prevalence of HIV-1 and HIV-2 infections and
associated  risk factors in men attending Abidjan's three sexually transmitted
disease  (STD) clinics; (2) to examine the use of such sites for
epidemiological  surveillance. DESIGN: Cross-sectional study. SETTING:
Abidjan's two main  STD clinics (Clinics A and T), and the University Hospital
Dermatology  outpatients clinic. PATIENTS: Consecutive patients with
genitourinary sym ptoms. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Prevalence of reactivity to
HIV-1, HIV-2,  and both viruses; descriptive characteristics of clinic
attenders;  clinical diagnoses of STD; risk factors associated with HIV-1 and
HIV-2  positivity. RESULTS: The overall prevalence of HIV (HIV-1 and/or HIV-2)
infection was 21% (250 out of 1169; 16% HIV-1, 2% HIV-2, 3% dual  reactivity).
Overall prevalence varied by clinic: University Hospital  Dermatology
outpatients clinic, 39%; Clinic T, 19%; Clinic A, 10%. Men  with STD had an
overall prevalence of 31% (155 out of 506), compared with  14% in men without
physical signs of STD (odds ratio 2.6, 95% confidence  interval 2.0-3.6). The
highest prevalence, 46%, was in men with genital  ulcer disease. Risk factors
associated with HIV-1 as well as with HIV-2  infection after multivariate
analysis were a history of sex with  prostitutes, lack of circumcision, being
unskilled, and a history of prior  genital ulcer. Current genital ulcer,
current STD and positive Treponema  pallidum haemagluttination assay were
associated with HIV-1 and dual  reactivity. CONCLUSIONS: Risk factors for HIV-2
infection in men attending  Abidjan STD clinics were broadly similar to those
for HIV-1 infection.  HIV-1 infection was more strongly associated with current
STD. Important  differences between the three clinics were observed in STD
prevalence and  type, and HIV seroprevalence. Such differences should be taken
into  account in the planning of HIV serosurveillance in STD clinics.

Pepin, J., Quigley, M., Todd, J., Gaye, I., Janneh, M., Van Dyck, E.,  Piot,
P., and Whittle, H. Association between HIV-2 infection and genital  ulcer
diseases among male sexually transmitted disease patients in The  Gambia. AIDS
6:489-493, 1992.  Abstract : Medical Research Council Laboratories, Fajara, The
Gambia  OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether genital ulcer diseases are cofactors
which enhance the transmission of HIV-2 in West Africa. DESIGN: A
cross-sectional study of 435 men presenting with a sexually transmitted
disease (STD). SETTING: The outpatient clinic of the Medical Research  Council
Laboratories, a primary care facility in Fajara, a suburb of  Banjul, the
capital city of The Gambia (West Africa). PATIENTS,  PARTICIPANTS: Six hundred
and twenty-four men presenting with a genital  complaint, of whom 443 had an
STD. Eight of the men with an STD were  excluded from further analysis because
they were HIV-1-infected (five  patients) or had indeterminate Western blot
patterns (three patients). The  remaining 21 HIV-2-infected and 414
seronegative men constituted our  study-group. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES:
Participants were questioned about  previous STD and behavioural and
demographic characteristics. A physical  examination was performed and serum c
ollected for measurement of  antibodies against Haemophilus ducreyi and
Treponema pallidum. RESULTS:  HIV-2-infected men were more likely than
HIV-seronegative participants to  have previously had a genital ulcer [odds
ratio (OR), 3.00; 95% confidence  interval (Cl), 1.18-7.60] and to have
antibodies against T. pallidum (OR,  5.95; 95% Cl, 2.10-16.91), or H. ducreyi
(OR, 4.59; 95% Cl, 1.71-12.33).  Circumcised patients with residual foreskin
were more likely to be HIV-2  infected than patients with complete
circumcision. HIV-2-seropositive  patients were six times more likely to have
generalized lymphadenopathy  than their seronegative counterparts. CONCLUSIONS:
Our data suggest that  genital ulcerative diseases, such as syphilis and
chancroid, are probably  cofactors that increase the transmission of HIV-2 in
West Africa, and that  HIV-2 infection frequently results in generalized
lymphadenopathy.

Bwayo, J.J., Omari, A.M., Mutere, A.N., Jaoko, W., Sekkade-Kigondu, C.,
Kreiss, J., and Plummer, F.A. Long distance truck-drivers: 1. Prevalence  of
sexually transmitted diseases (STDs). East.Afr.Med.J. 68:425-429, 1991.
Abstract : Department of Medical Microbiology, College of Health Sciences,
University of Nairobi A cross section study was conducted among long  distance
truck drivers to determine the prevalence of sexually transmitted  diseases
(STDs) and antibodies to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). A  total of 8
drivers and their assistants en route from port of Mombasa to  countries in
East and Central Africa were enrolled into the study. Blood  was taken for HIV
and syphilis serology. Discharges from urethra and genita l ulcer disease (GUD)
were cultured. Seroprevalence for HIV was 18% and  4.6% for syphilis. Fifty
percent of Neisseria Gonorrhea cultured were  penicillinase producers. Most of
the men with urethral discharge and all  the GUD were culture negative,
probably due to prior treatment. Lack of  circumcision, past history of GUD and
urethritis were significantly  associated with HIV seroconversion.

Jessamine, P.G., Plummer, F.A., Ndinya Achola, J.O., Wainberg, M.A.,  Wamola,
I., D'Costa, L.J., Cameron, D.W., Simonsen, J.N., Plourde, P., and  Ronald,
A.R. Human immunodeficiency virus, genital ulcers and the male  foreskin:
synergism in HIV-1 transmission. Scand.J.Infect.Dis.Suppl.  69:181-186, 1990.
Abstract : University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada Epidemiologic studies  in
Nairobi and elsewhere in Africa, have shown that men infected with  HIV-1 more
commonly have a history of genital ulcer disease compared to  uninfected men.
In one study, HIV infected men were three times as likely  to have a recent
history of genital ulcers. In a prospective study of  seronegative men, those
presenting with chancroid had a five-fold risk of  seroconversion during
follow-up compared to men presenting with  urethritis. Uncircumcised men had an
increased risk of seroconversion  which was independent of their risk of
genital ulcer disease. Over 95% of  attributable risk in men with STD was
either genital ulceration or the  presence of a foreskin. Genital ulcers are a
major risk factor for HIV  infection among prostitutes. The increased risk is
about 10-fold among  prostitutes with ulcers compared to a cohort who did not.
We hypothesize  from these studies that genital ulcers are the major portals of
entry for  HIV infection and also increased shedding of virus infected cells
into the  vaginal secretions. HIV seropositive prostitutes are more susceptible
to  chancroid with a two-fold increase in the prevalence of genital ulcers as
compared to HIV negative women. The use of condoms by their clients  prevents
both genital ulcer disease and HIV acquisition among prostitutes.  Chancroid is
more difficult to treat in HIV infected men with one-third of  patients failing
single dose treatment regimens as compared to less than  five percent of men
without HIV infection.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250  WORDS).

Moses, S., Bradley, J.E., Nagelkerke, N.J., Ronald, A.R., Ndinya-Achola,  J.O.,
and Plummer, F.A. Geographical patterns of male circumcision  practices in
Africa: association with HIV seroprevalence. Int.J.Epidemiol.  19:693-697,
1990.  Abstract : Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Nairobi,
Kenya To ascertain whether male circumcision might explain some of the
geographical variation in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)  seroprevalence in
Africa, we investigated the association between the  practice of male
circumcision at a societal level and HIV seroprevalence.  Male circumcision
practices for over 700 African societies were  identified, and HIV
seroprevalence in general adult populations from 140  distinct locations in 41
countries was obtained. In locations where male  circumcision is practised, HIV
seroprevalence was considerably lower than  in areas where it is not practised.
This study supports the hypothesis  that lack of circumcision in males is a
risk factor for HIV transmission.
Bongaarts, J., Reining, P., Way, P., and Conant, F. The relationship  between
male circumcision and HIV infection in African populations. AIDS  3:373-377,
1989.  Abstract : Research Division, New York City, New York 10017 The
relationship between HIV seroprevalence and the proportion of  uncircumcised
males in African countries is examined to determine whether  circumcision
practices play a role in explaining the large existing  variation in the sizes
of African HIV epidemics. A review of the  anthropological literature yielded
estimates of circumcision practices for  409 African ethnic groups from which
corresponding national estimates were  derived. HIV seroprevalence rates in the
capital cities were used as  indicators of the relative level of HIV infection
of countries. The  correlation between these two variables in 37 African
countries was high  (R = 0.9; P less than 0.001). This finding is consistent
with existing clin ic-based studies that indicate a lower risk of HIV infection
among  circumcised males.

Cameron, D.W., Simonsen, J.N., D'Costa, L.J., Ronald, A.R., Maitha, G.M.,
Gakinya, M.N., Cheang, M., Ndinya-Achola, J.O., Piot, P., and Brunham,  R.C.
Female to male transmission of human immunodeficiency virus type 1:  risk
factors for seroconversion in men [see comments]. Lancet 2:403-407,  1989.
Abstract : Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Nairobi,  Kenya To
determine the frequency and risk factors for female to male  sexual
transmission of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1), a  prospective
study was carried out in 422 men who had acquired a sexually  transmitted
disease (STD) from a group of prostitutes with a prevalence of  HIV-1 infection
of 85%. The initial seroprevalence of HIV among the men  was 12%. 24 of 293
(8.2%) initially seronegative men seroconverted to  HIV-1. Newly acquired
infection was independently associated with frequent  prostitute contact (risk
ratio 3.2, 95% confidence interval 1.2-8.1), with  the acquisition of genital
ulcer disease (risk ratio 4.7, 95% confidence  interval 1.3-17.0), and with
being uncircumcised (risk ratio 8.2, 95%  confidence interval 3.0-23.0). 96% of
documented seroconversions occurred  in men with one or both of the latter two
risk factors. In a subgroup of  73 seronegative men who reported a single
prostitute sexual contact, the  frequency of HIV-1 infection was 8.2% during 12
weeks of observation. No  man without a genital ulcer seroconverted. A
cumulative 43% of  uncircumcised men who acquired an ulcer seroconverted to
HIV-1 after a  single sexual exposure. These data indicate an extremely high
rate of  female to male transmission of HIV-1 in the presence of STD and
confirm a  causal relation between lack of male circumcision, genital ulcer
disease,  and susceptibility to HIV-1 infection.

Greenblatt, R.M., Lukehart, S.A., Plummer, F.A., Quinn, T.C., Critchlow,  C.W.,
Ashley, R.L., D'Costa, L.J., Ndinya-Achola, J.O., Corey, L., and  Ronald, A.R.
Genital ulceration as a risk factor for human  immunodeficiency virus
infection. AIDS 2:47-50, 1988.  Abstract : Department of Medicine, University
of Washington, Seattle Among  115 heterosexual men who presented with genital
ulcers to a sexually  transmitted disease clinic in Nairobi, Kenya, the
prevalence of serum  antibody to HIV was 16.5%. A past history of genital
ulcers was reported  by 12 (63%) of 19 men with antibody to HIV versus 30 (31%)
of 96 without  antibody (P = 0.008). HIV infection was also positively
associated with  lack of circumcision, but was not associated with the etiology
of the  current genital ulcer. Logistic regression analysis (adjusted for age,
number of recent sex partners, recent prostitute contact, circumcision,  tribal
ethnic identity, past history of urethritis, and current diagnoses)  confirmed
only the association between prior history of genital ulcer  disease and HIV
infection; (P = 0.04, odds ratio 2.35, 95% confidence  limits, 1.01-5.47). The
incidence of genital ulcers, particularly  chancroid, is much higher in parts
of Africa than in Europe or North  America. This may contribute to the
increased risk of heterosexual  transmission of HIV in Africa. Aggressive
control of chancroid and  syphilis may offer one very feasible approach to
reducing transmission of  HIV in this region.

Simonsen, J.N., Cameron, D.W., Gakinya, M.N., Ndinya-Achola, J.O.,  D'Costa,
L.J., Karasira, P., Cheang, M., Ronald, A.R., Piot, P., and  Plummer, F.A.
Human immunodeficiency virus infection among men with  sexually transmitted
diseases. Experience from a center in Africa.  N.Engl.J.Med. 319:274-278,
1988.  Abstract : Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Nairobi,
Kenya Heterosexual transmission of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
appears to occur readily in Africa but less commonly in North America and
Europe. We conducted a case-control study among men attending a clinic for
sexually transmitted diseases in Nairobi to determine the prevalence of  HIV
infection and the risk factors involved. HIV antibody was detected in  11.2
percent of 340 men who enrolled in the study. Reports of nonvaginal
heterosexual intercourse and homosexuality were notably rare. Recent
injections and blood transfusions were not associated with HIV infection.
Travel and frequent contact with prostitutes were associated with HIV
seropositivity. Men who were uncircumcised were more likely to have HIV
infection (odds ratio, 2.7; P = 0.003), as were those who reported a  history
of genital ulcers (odds ratio, 7.2; P less than 0.001). A current  diagnosis of
genital ulcers was also associated with HIV seropositivity  (odds ratio, 2.0; P
= 0.028). Multivariate analysis revealed an  independent association of genital
ulcers with HIV infection in both  circumcised and uncircumcised men.
Uncircumcised men were more frequently  infected with HIV, regardless of a
history of genital ulcers. Our study  finds that genital ulcers and an intact
foreskin are associated with HIV  infection in men with a sexually transmitted
disease. Genital ulcers may  increase men's susceptibility to HIV, or they may
increase the infectivity  of women infected with HIV. The intact foreskin may
operate to increase  the susceptibility to HIV.


