Date: Fri, 13 Oct 1995 15:19:36 -0500

Wiswell has published that the foreskin CAUSES urinary tract infection based 
on studies, the design of which make it impossible to ever prove causality. 
Physicians who do not understand the lack of power in a retrospective chart 
review or who are promoting circumcision have actually believed Wiswell. 
Unlike Wiswell I have not intentionally been misleading, but was trying to 
provoke thought on this cloudy issue.

The experiment of circumcision in the United States has obviously failed to 
protect the men there from HIV infections. With 90% of men in their 20's and 
30's circumcised, would circumcising the other 10% have made the HIV pandemic 
any different in the United States? It may have made it worse. Who knows? 
This needs to be thoroughly investigated, however, before circumcision can be 
recommended in the fight against HIV. An association calls attention to the 
need for further study. Any further conclusion is not warranted.

Also the AIDS rates in Asia reflect the locations where American servicemen 
prefer to get their R&R. This suggests that American males in their late 
teens and early twenties, 90% of whom are circumcised, may be a vector in 
spreading HIV throughout Asia. Why else would Guam have such a high rate of 
AIDS?

It has been suggested that the tight skin over an erect circumcised phallus 
predisposes it to abrasions, tears, and bleeding, which may increase the 
possibility of transmission of HIV during vaginal or anal intercourse. 
(Beaugi M. Conservative Treatment of Primary Phimosis in Adolescents 
[Traitement Me/dical du Phimoseis Congenital de L'Adolescent]. Saint-Antoine 
University. Paris VI. 1990-1991.)

There is also difficulty in adequately studying relatively rare events. 
Fortunately, while an HIV infection is deadly, it is rare. The WHO rates for 
AIDS in the US are 14 per 100,000. In order to draw reliable conclusions 
about rare illnesses, the number of patients studied need to be inordinately 
large. The flip side of this coin is that statistically, large numbers can 
prove things to be statistically different where no appreciable clinical 
difference exists (an example of this is Wiswell's studies on circumcision 
and urinary tract infections). The alternative is to study populations who 
are, for whatever reason, at a higher risk than the general population. The 
trouble with these studies is whether the results are applicable to the 
general population. Also the low number of patients decreases the statistical 
power of the results (which is why most of the studies looking at HIV and 
circumcision have huge 95% confidence intervals). All of these factors lead 
to perpetual uncertainty and proponents of different agendas using the same 
data in different ways.

It is certainly not my role to promote disingenuous positions.
Bob Van Howe

