THE NEW ENGLAND JOURNAL OF MEDICINE, August 21, 1997, Volume 337,
page 568.

Correspondence

Lidocaine-Prilocaine Cream for Pain during Circumcision

To the Editor:  The study by Taddio et al. (April 24 issue)[1] raises
several troubling questions.  First, if neonatal circumcision is not
undertaken for medical reasons, is it ethical to conduct medical
research on it?  In the vast majority of cases, circumcision is done
for religious or cultural reasons.  The Canadian Paediatric Society
reviewed the literature extensively and concluded that any small
medical benefits do not outweigh the risks and that neonatal
circumcision should not be routinely performed.[2]  Moreover, neonatal
circumcision is done without the consent of the subject, removes
healthy tissue with a unique anatomical structure and function, and
leads to differences is adult sexual behavior.[3]

    Circumcision can be deeply connected with religious belief, and
any interference with this requires profound consideration and
justification.  We need, therefore, to address the issue directly and
end the persistent effort to find a medical rationale for circumcision
by removing the cloak of medicine from this procedure.  Should
nonmedical infant circumcision or research involving it be carried
out, and if so, should it be conducted by physicians, and under what
conditions?

    Second, assuming that is was ethically acceptable for Taddio et
al. to undertake this study, was it ethical for them to include in it
a group of infants circumcised without anesthesia?  Generally accepted
principles governing the ethics of research require clinical
equipoise[4] - that is, before a randomized trial can be undertaken,
the generally accepted medical opinion must be that no one treatment
is superior to another, and the researchers must share this opinion.
In this case, was there clinical equipoise at the outset of the study?

MARGARET A. SOMERVILLE, F.R.S.C., LL.D.
McGill Centre for Medicine, Ethics, and Law
Montreal, QC  H3A 1W9, Canada

DAVID M. ALWIN, M.D.
St. Mary's Hospital
Montreal, QC  H3T 1M5, Canada

1.  Taddio A. Stevens B, Craig K, et. al.  Efficacy and safety of
    lidocaine-prilocaine cream for pain during circumcision.  N Engl J
    Med 1997; 336: 1197-201.

2.  Fetus and Newborn Committee, Canadian Paediatric Society. Neonatal
    circumcision revisited. Can Med Assoc J 1996; 154:769-80.

3.  Laumann EO, Masi CM, Zuckermann EW. Circumcision in the United
    States: prevalence prophylactic effects, and sexual practice. JAMA
    1997; 277:1052-7.

4.  Freedman B. Equipoise and the ethics of clinical research. N Engl
    J Med 1987;317: 141-5.


Cite as:

Somerville, MA, Alwin DM. Lidocaine-Prilocaine Cream for Pain During
Circumcision (Letter). N Engl J Med 1997; 337: 568.

(Transcribed 15 November 1997)
