From: Johnny4444@aol.com
Date: Wed, 20 Dec 1995 19:54:59 -0500
Message-ID: <951220190150_20136298@emout05.mail.aol.com>
To: noharmm-l@eskimo.com
Subject: "The Darker Regions of the Human Mind"
Sender: owner-noharmm-l@eskimo.com
Precedence: bulk
Reply-To: noharmm-l@eskimo.com


"THE DARKER REGIONS OF THE HUMAN MIND"

Some Statements About Circumcisers
From "The Unkindest Cut of All," by John M. Foley, MD
Fact, July 1966, Ralph Ginzburg, Publisher
[Quoted with permission]


      . . . why anyone would want circumcision made compulsory
may seem puzzling . . .
      . . . One answer, of course, is that if circumcision
were made compulsory, the circumciser would be protected
whenever he happens to cripple or kill the little boy he
operates on--a "complication" that is not so very uncommon.
Another answer, I think, must be sought in the darker regions
of the human mind, because circumcision is simply an
unmitigated fraud. It is nothing but wanton and unnecessary
mutilation. The annual 2 million assembly-line circumcisions
in this country are a monument to the gullibility and
stupidity of the American public.
      For 60 years, a powerful and articulate minority in our
profession has tried to enforce a taboo against any objective
discussion of the merits or demerits of circumcision. . . .
To question its value has become all but unthinkable. The
medical literature is virtually closed except to those who
drool over the operation's alleged advantages.
      . . . William Keith C. Morgan, M.D., . . . has written
in the Journal of the American Medical Association[:] . . .
"Why is the operation of circumcision practiced? One might as
well attempt to explain the rites of voodoo!" . . . Peter Van
Zante, M.D., . . . writes in the Medical Tribune:
"Circumcision of a helpless child is a crime." Elsewhere he
has said: "Circumcision is cruel and mutilating and actually
should be outlawed." In 1920, a British physician named G. S.
Thompson, who had once circumcised himself, later concluded
that circumcision was nothing more nor less than "a barbarous
and unnecessary mutilation" (British Medical Journal, 1920). 
      Efforts to justify circumcision have been made since the
very beginnings of history. The desire to mutilate came first;
the "reasons" came later . . .
      This process of rationalization has culminated in the
supposed relationship between the husband's foreskin and
cancer of the genitals--one of the greatest hoaxes in the
history of medicine . . .
      . . . Circumcision provides a convenient and socially
acceptable outlet for the perverted component of the
circumciser's libido. I have had personal experience with the
psychopathology that underlies the wish to circumcise. The
pitiful wails of the suffering infant are all too often the
background for lewd and obscene commentary by the obstetrician
to his audience of nurses. Several years ago I saw an infant
born with multiple deformities. He could not live more than a
few months at most, but to add to his miseries, this
unfortunate bit of humanity had to undergo a thorough
circumcision.
      I have seen two medical students fight over the
privilege of doing circumcisions on the newborn, although
these same students showed neither interest nor aptitude for
opening boils or doing other surgical tasks.
      In 1951, I witnessed an autopsy on an infant who had
died from an infected circumcision--a death rendered even more
tragic because the mother had tried to persuade the
obstetrician to spare her infant the ordeal.
      Dr. Alexander Schaffer, a noted pediatrician, tells with
horror of a case in which an infant was being delivered as a
frank breech (buttocks first). Before delivering the baby, and
just as the penis came into view, the obstetrician seized it
and circumcised it. That obstetrician, I would say, may be
capable . . . . But sexually I say he is a monster. And I say
that one of the reasons why circumcision is so common in this
country stems from the sadism of the crypto-pervert.
      . . . psychiatrists have long been agreed that
circumcision is basically a punitive act . . .
      . . . they [those who want all males circumcised] suffer
from "foreskin envy." Cut off a man's tonsils and it does not
affect his feelings about his neighbor's tonsils, but cut off
his foreskin and his neighbor's foreskin becomes an object of
envy and hatred. The circumcised have always behaved as if
their circumcision were a stigma of inferiority. Jew, Moor,
and Turk forced circumcision on servants, slaves, and whole
nations of conquered people.
      Because the motivations of the foreskin-phobes are so
irrational, these people are hard to combat. The introduction
of routine circumcision as a "medical" measure at the turn of
the century aroused vigorous opposition within the profession.
Dr. Warren Stone Bickham, an eminent surgeon, declared that
circumcision was a disgrace and a discredit to the surgeon
responsible. Nevertheless by 1920 the opposition had dwindled,
and the fanatical circumcisers were in possession of the
field. The opponents of circumcision failed because they did
not understand the motives of the circumcisers and therefore
could not grapple with them.
      . . . Only the circumcised refer to the foreskin as a
"useless appendage."

      [Has anyone done a study on circumcisers? What kind of
person trains himself (or herself) and maneuvers himself (or
herself) into a position where he (or she) can get paid to cut
healthy erotogenic tissue -- living flesh -- from the genitals
of unwilling, unconsenting children and babies -- or, for that
matter, from willing, consenting adults?]



[This document, formatted here as an ASCII text file, is from
Deeper Into Circumcision: An Invitation to Awareness and Guide
to Resources for Researchers, Parents, Restorers, Activists
and the Merely Curious, by John A. Erickson.]

