From: Johnny4444@aol.com
Date: Sun, 17 Dec 1995 10:08:41 -0500
Message-ID: <951217100839_74683679@mail04.mail.aol.com>
To: noharmm-l@eskimo.com
Subject: "I Fucked Her Raw" (AIDS & Other STDs)
Sender: owner-noharmm-l@eskimo.com
Precedence: bulk
Reply-To: noharmm-l@eskimo.com

"I FUCKED HER RAW"

(Circumcision / AIDS and Other Sexually Transmitted Diseases)



      "It is my hypothesis that the presence of a foreskin
predisposes both heterosexual and homosexual men to the
acquisition of AIDS." Aaron J. Fink, MD, "Letters," New
England Journal of Medicine, 10/29/86, p. 1167 



      "The prepuce . . . may actually provide a physical or
immunological barrier against infection. That theory is born
out by a new study from the U.S. Army . . . [which] found that
circumcised males were 1.65 times as likely to have the most
common sexually transmitted disease there is, Chlamydia."
(Dean Edell, MD, San Francisco Chronicle, June 17, 1987)

      "Other venereal diseases that do not cause ulcers but
often cause inflammation, such as gonorrhea and chlamydia,
also appear to increase the risk of AIDS infection." ("Host of
factors help spread virus," New York Times Service, The Globe
and Mail, Toronto, Sept. 17, 1990) [Source unconfirmed]

      ". . . male circumcision is widespread in sub-Sahara
Africa and is performed in many of the areas where AIDS has
been identified. As with the investigation of any postulated
risk factor for AIDS, well controlled epidemiologic studies
should also address the issue of male circumcision." (Letter
from Jack A. DeHovitz, MD [Assistant Medical Director,
Spellman AIDS Program, St. Clare's Hospital, NY], New York
State Journal of Medicine, August 1986)

      ". . . the data also show a somewhat higher incidence of
genital warts, nongonococcal urethritis, and scabies in the
circumcised men . . . examination of large numbers of healthy
[circumcised] men in both military and civilian circumstances
discloses a very substantial incidence of persistent suture
holes, microsinuses, skin tabs and bridging, and irregular
scarring all subject to abrasion and the accumulation of moist
debris." (Letter from John G. Swadey, MD, The New England
Journal of Medicine, June 11, 1987) 

      "It is equally plausible that the AIDS virus enters the
active male partner, involved in vaginal or anal sex, through
the fragile columnal cells lining the urethra. Circumcision
removes the protection normally provided by the foreskin, thus
predisposing the [circumcised] penis to meatal ulceration and
subsequent meatal stenosis . . . One could extrapolate his
[Dr. Fink's] hypothesis to suggest that the absence of
circumcision [i.e., the presence of a foreskin] may actually
protect against transmission of AIDS by protecting the
urethral mucosa." (Letter from Robert W. Enzenauer, MD, The
New England Journal of Medicine, June 11, 1987)

      ". . . by the end of the second week [after
circumcision] about 75% of my sensitivity was gone . . . my
glans . . . [now] requires greater pressure to achieve orgasm
. . . Concerning anal sex, I was never 'big' on it . . . now I
seek it constantly; it is, in a way, a longing for the
protective sheath I have lost along with its moisture and
warmth." ("Circumcision: Prime Cut," by George Desantis, QQ
Magazine, March/April 1976)

      "Some circumcised gay men also seek out intact lovers
for 'docking,' placing penises ene-to-end so that the foreskin
of the intact penis can be shared with the bare glans of the
circumcised one . . . Docking . . . would seem to be a high
risk activity, especially if done to orgasm." (Circumcision:
What It Does, by Billy Ray Boyd, Taterhill Press, San
Francisco, 1990)

      ". . . since both circumcision and condoms reduce sexual
sensitivity . . . routine circumcision may have helped set
this country up for the AIDS epidemic by increasing the
natural resistance to using condoms . . . by depriving men of
full sexual sensation, they [circumcisers] might actually be
encouraging the very forms of sexual relating that are most
risky   unprotected anal and vaginal intercourse."
(Circumcision: What It Does, by Billy Ray Boyd, Taterhill
Press, San Francisco, 1990)

      "The only reason I'm gay is that I was circumcised when
I was a baby. I feel deprived. It's only with an uncircum-
cised man that I can have a foreskin." ("'Feelings Too Violent
to Describe'   Some Statements About Circumcision by
Circumcised Men," Making America Safe for Foreskins, by John
A. Erickson) [Circumcision didn't "protect" the man who made
this statement from AIDS. He died February 24, 1990, in New
Orleans   of AIDS.]

      "With intravaginal containment of the normal penis, the
male's mobile sheath is placed within the woman's vaginal
sheath. It is impossible to imagine a better mechanical
arrangement for non-abrasive stimulation of the male and
female genitalia than this slick 'sheath within a sheath.'
Circumcision destroys this one sheath within a sheath . . . I
would hazard a guess, that dyspareunia [painful intercourse]
is more common in the women whose husband is circumcised . . .
one would be foolish to discount the circumcised male's
immobile penile skin sheath as an ancillary item contributing
to vaginal, abrasive discomfort . . . The male with a penis
already moderately obtunded by circumcision may be less apt to
use a condom, which he feels may further decrease his genital
sensitivity . . . because most American males lack a facile
prepuce, the period of foreplay and dalliance may be
abbreviated in the rush to the intra-vaginal method of penile
stimulation. Both these factors conceivably could be of
significance in increasing the rate of venereal disease,
including AIDS . . . " (Say No to Circumcision! 40 Compelling
Reasons Why You Should Respect His Birthright and Leave Your
Son Whole [manuscript], by Thomas A. Ritter, MD, Hourglass
Book Publishing, 1992)

      "Intercourse with a circumcised man and intercourse with
an uncircumcised man are two entirely different experiences. I
can *always* tell from the feeling alone whether or not a man
is circumcised. Circumcised men take longer to ejaculate. They
have to work at it." (From a conversation with a prostitute)

      "That little operation [the circumcision of her
boyfriend] completely destroyed our life together . . . sex
became very painful for me. Twice I had to see a doctor due to
minor infections from chafing. Our beautiful sexual
togetherness became a nightmare of staying creams, lubricants,
and frustrations." (Letter from Carolyn LaRoc, Playgirl, Feb.
1975)

      ". . . the AIDS virus is transmitted . . . during a
sexual encounter violent enough to open a blood channel,
either through mucous membranes or broken skin . . ." 
("AIDS," by John Langone, Discover, Dec. 1985)

      "I fucked her raw." (U.S. locker room expression)


[This document, formatted here as an ASCII text file, is from
Deeper Into Circumcision: An Invitation to Awareness, by John
A. Erickson.]

