Subject: Re: Any knowledge of forced male circumcision by prison authorities?
Date: 4 Jan 1996 19:32:50 GMT
From: bfreeman@acs4.acs.ucalgary.ca (Clyde Bruce Freeman)
Organization: The University of Calgary
Newsgroups: alt.prisons
References: <30E1D220.9C2@mailbag.com> <4cggvq$l6k@newsbf02.news.aol.com>

Lary95 (lary95@aol.com) wrote:
: In article <30E1D220.9C2@mailbag.com>, Stan <stanemer@mailbag.com> writes:
: >
: >As a researcher in the problem of circumcision in the US, does anyone
: have
: >knowledge of men having normal, healthy foreskins being pressured, forced
: or
: >deceived into undergoing adult circumcision? In this very sick, violent,
: >self-destructive, and mutilating nation, this probably has happened to
: normal
: >intact (i. e. uncut, not-circumcised) men.

: Why would a prison want to do this to anyone?  For what possible gain?
: And why do you believe this has "probably" happened to people?

: Larry

I'm not about to become involved in the political debate involving
involuntary circumcision of male infants, adolescents, or adults but I
can comment on the practice from a historical perspective in both
juvenile & adult detention facilities.

First, such practices did occur.  Second, the authorities that ordered
such procedures did consider they had sufficient reason for involuntary
procedures such as circumcision.   I'll elaborate.

Masturbation, particularly male, from about 1880 to the late 1930's was
considered in North American (and some Western European countries) society
very much to be a social concern.  "Scientists" viewed masturbation as
a serious threat to ones' physical and mental well being (as a result
of the loss of "vital fluids").  Circumcision was considered by many
surgeons to be the treatment of choice to eliminate such "dangerous"
practices.  Of course, a variety of other methods were also used including
lectures on the dangers of masturbation and bedroom observation (youths
were ordered to sleep with their hands at all times visible).  At times it
was considered necessary to restrain the youth's hands' with handcuffs or
to have him wear a penis sheath (equipped with spikes!).  In chronic
cases, castration was on occasion performed.  But as mentioned above, at
least within the medical community, the standard therapy to
"cure" the masturbating youth was circumcision.   Some doctors considered
the surgical procedure in the case of "tight" foreskins as preventative
medicine.  "Corrective" surgery was performed to eliminate the risk of
the youth losening his own foreskin through masturbation.

A survey of the practices of five juvenile detention facilities was
made by Alida Bowler & Ruth Bloodgood on behalf of the US Dept. of Labour
and Children's Bureat and published in  1935.  The study indicates
that all youths were given a medical examination upon admission and
document that in at least three institutions, circumcision was performed
regularly.

In 1931 at the Boys' Vocational School in Lansing (Michigan), 50 youths
aged 12 to 17 were circumcised (note that 488 boys were admitted to this
institution during the fiscal year of 1930-31).

The practices in Ohio during 1931 at the Boy's Industrial School (Lancaster)
were much different; that year only four boys were circumcised.

At the State Home for Boys (JAmesburg, New Jersey), the report authors
note, "[a] considerable amount of corrective medial and surgical work was
done as a regular part of institutional treatment.  Minor operations,
such as circumcisions and removal of adenoids and disceased tonsils were
performed at the [institution] hospital by the resident physician." (p. 101).

Alexander W. Pisciotta (1994) published a historical study of the early
years of the Elmira REformatory in New York.  Dr. Hamilton Wey, dealt
with masturbators by the surgical procedure of "infibulation" whereby
a metal ring was placed through the skin of the foreskin.  An inmate
described the procedure:
        They laid me out on a table and chloroformed me.  I did not know what
        they intended to do.  When I came out from the influence of the
        chloroform, I found a ring over the head of my penis.  It was
        very painful to me...The scars are still on my penis were the rings
        were inserted.  (p. 46)

From 1899 to 1906, 382 Elmira inmates underwent forced sterilizations to
combat the threat of masturbation and problem of future generations of
"defectives".  Dr. Harry Sharp first performed the procedure on a 19-year-old
inmate who previously masturbated four to ten times per day.  Sharp
commented that after the procedure,
        [t]he boy ceased to practice masturbation; notwithstanding the fact
        that desire still existed, he had mustered enough will power
        to desist.  His mental habitude and physical condition greatly
        improved.  (p. 132).

I should point out that Pisciotta does not mention specifically that
circumsicion was used at Elmira as a masturbation control stategy but I
would suggest that it is certainly not beyond the realm of possiblity.

Bowler, A. C. & R. S. Bloodgood.  1935.  _Institutional treatment of
delinquent boys_.  Washington:  US Gov't. Printing Office.

Pisciotta, A. W.  1994.  _Benevolent repression:  social control and the
American reformatory-prison movment_.  New York:  NY University Press.

Bruce Freeman
bfreeman@acs.ucalgary.ca
