
"A SCREAM WE WILL NEVER FORGET"

(Some Statements Documenting Infant Circumcision Pain)



      ". . . [circumcision causes the baby] 
little, if any, pain, since the pain fiber 
tracts are not yet fully developed . . ." 
(Neonatal Circumcision *Is* Necessary, 
[pamphlet] by Gerald N. Weiss, MD 
(11716 Pleasant Ridge Circle #1905, 
Little Rock, AR 72212-2371)



      "The pain of [infant] circumcision is not a debatable 
question; it is a fact." ("Circumcision: Ritual Surgery or 
Surgical Ritual?," by Edward Wallerstein, Medicine and Law, 
Springer-Verlag, 1983) 
 
      "[Circumcision] is a stressful and painful event . . . 
with . . . changes in heart rate, respiratory rate, 
transcutaneous pO2, adrenal cortical hormone secretions, sleep 
patterns, and behavioral patterns during and/or following 
circumcision. Indeed, circumcision has been recommended as a 
model for studying pain in the neonate, and its effects are 
suggested to be long lasting."(Developmental & Behavioral
Pediatrics, Vol. 5, No. 5, October 1984) 

      "The operation is decidedly painful and in newborns
anesthesia (local or general) is rarely used because of the 
possible risks . . ." ("Physicians have found no health 
justification for routine circumcision of newborns," New York 
Times, August 14, 1985) 

      "Newborns do feel pain . . . the contrary belief that
the smallest babies . . . are oblivious to pain has persisted
for decades among many physicians who have routinely operated
on these children with little or no anesthesia." ("Infants'
Sense of Pain is Recognized, Finally," New York Times, Nov.
24, 1987)

      "The American Academy of Pediatrics, saying that even 
premature babies are capable of feeling pain during surgery, 
has recommended the use of anesthesia on newborn infants . . . 
the academy, in a policy statement published in the September
issue of Pediatrics, said that recent research shows that even 
premature babies are capable of feeling deep pain in surgery." 
("Baby Doctors Say Newborns Can Feel Pain," San Francisco 
Chronicle, Sept. 7, 1987) 

      ". . . research reveals that the pain pathways are much 
more advanced in newborns than previously thought, and the 
physical response to pain is the same for both newborns and 
adults. . . . Using the pain cry as an indicator, some 
investigators have shown that newborns are actually more 
sensitive to pain than older infants. . . . Babies not only
feel the pain of circumcision but they also seem to remember
the pain." ("New research shows infants do feel pain at
damaging levels," San Francisco Examiner, Dec. 17, 1987) 
 
      "Infants undergoing circumcision without anesthesia
demonstrate physiologic responses suggesting that they are
experiencing pain. The observed responses include behavioral, 
cardiovascular, and hormonal changes. Pain pathways as well as 
the cortical and subcortical centers necessary for pain
perception are well developed by the third trimester.
Responses to painful stimuli have been documented in neonates
of all viable gestational ages. Behavioral changes include a
cry pattern indicating distress during the circumcision
procedure and changes in activity (irritability, varying sleep
patterns) and in infant-maternal interaction for the first few
hours after. . . ." (Report of the Task Force on Circumcision, 
American Academy of Pediatrics, 1989)

      "The younger the child is, the closer he is to
conception, the more open and vulnerable that child is to
hurt. Newborn babies have that much more feelings, more
sensitivity, and are more vulnerable to pain than older
children." (E. Michael Holden, MD [quoted], Circumcision: The
Painful Dilemma, by Rosemary Romberg, Bergin & Garvey, 1985,
p. 306) 
 
      ". . . it has been argued that the infant suffers little 
or no pain in the circumcision process. The evidence offered
is that in the ritual Jewish circumcision, the infant, who is
given an alcohol teat during surgery, cries little and almost
immediately goes to sleep. That argument shows an ignorance of
the effects of alcohol on infants and fails to acknowledge
that 'sleep' may be a response to pain." ("Circumcision as
Child Abuse: The Legal and Constitutional Issues," by William
E. Brigman, Journal of Family Law, University of Louisville
School of Law, Louisville, Kentucky) 
 
      "A newborn baby is . . . as able to perceive pain as any
other person. . . . Some babies scream frantically while being
circumcised. However, some babies . . . lapse into a 
semi-coma . . . the pain and trauma are so great that the baby
cannot cry! This absence of crying has led many parents,
doctors and others to believe that the operation did not hurt
him." ("Circumcision," by Rosemary Romberg, Circumcision: The
Rest of the Story -- A Selection of Articles, Letters, and
Resources, 1979-1993, edited by Peggy O'Mara, Mothering) 
 
      "I know that the circumcisions I have done, without
exception, have been painful for the baby. In medical school I
was taught that the baby's nervous system is not developed
sufficiently to be aware of the pain. . . . But my experience
in doing it and observing the baby's reactions tell me
otherwise." (Howard Marchbanks, MD [quoted], Circumcision: The
Painful Dilemma, p. 133) 
 
      "After witnessing many circumcisions, I can say: Yes, it
hurts. It's pure and simple torture." ("A Nurse's View on
Circumcision," by Terry Schultz, Circumcision: The Rest of the
Story) 
 
      "I've videotaped circumcisions for teaching purposes,
and no one, especially the doctor, is aware of the pain until
he sees the baby's reaction on tape. It's horrifying--there's
no doubt that he's feeling intense pain." ("Second Thoughts
About Circumcision," by Marianne Neifert, MD, Pediatrician,
Child, Jan./Feb. 1989)

      "I repeatedly asked the doctor if it [the circumcision
operation] would hurt Shawn and he repeatedly said no."
(Shawn's mother, Vicki Campbell [quoted], Circumcision: The
Painful Dilemma, p. 317) 
 
      "I have never heard such screams." ("Zachary's
Circumcision," by his mother, Lauren Friederich, Circumcision:
The Rest of the Story) 
 
      "Jesse let out a scream we will never forget. It
crescendoed up and up until his mouth hung open, face
distorted, and no sound came out." ("Jesse's Circumcision," by
his father, M. Pickard-Ginsberg, Circumcision: The Rest of the
Story)

      "They told me there would be no pain . . . a tremendous
flash of blinding white pain surged through my entire 
body . . . I thought I had been electrocuted and was 
dead . . . The pain was the worst I have ever had . . . I
cannot imagine any pain possibly being worse." (From a letter
to Rosemary Romberg from a man in Florida, circumcised at age
25 *under local anesthesia*.) 



      "I will die hearing my baby's screams." (Miriam Pollack,
Third International Symposium on Circumcision, University of
Maryland, May 1994)



[This document, formatted here as an ASCII text file, is taken
from Deeper Into Circumcision: An Invitation to Awareness and
Guide to Resources for Researchers, Parents, Restorers,
Activists and the Merely Curious, by John A. Erickson.]

