I think it is very rude to shout at parents that they made the
"wrong" decision. They had the best interests of their child at
heart. If there have been such attacks from pro-intact people, I
hope they will stop.

However, what we CAN do is work towards understanding in the long
term, vis-a-vis routine infant circumcision.

The message is: that the prepuce is a normal, healthy part of the
body; that in 90% of cases the prepuce will cause no problems for
a man during his lifetime, and the remaining 9.9% can be treated
in less drastic ways; that RIC has more risks than doctors will
often admit; that it was brought in during the last century as a
_moral_ hygiene measure; that "medical" benefits are questionable
at best; that circ performed without anaesthesia is painful; and,
last but most important, a child (male or female) will be an adult
all too soon, who has the right to decide these things for for him
or herself.

All of these arguments indicate that neonatal circ should not be
taken lightly, whether or not the parents were made aware of them
by the doctor.

If we disagree about anything, let it not be that circumcision is
done against the will of the male concerned.

I don't think the circumcision question has two right answers. But
then again, I am one who dares to have an opinion. I am circumcised,
and I don't like it.  I feel that my right to a healthy, intact
body was violated. I would have chosen to keep the protection,
comfort and sexual function afforded by my foreskin.  And I feel
that the rights of other men and women are violated every day, by
having their genitals altered against their wills.

I dare say it takes a lot of courage to utter in this part of the
world and at this time in history: "But", as Galileo Galilei once
said, "it does move."

g.

--
        A long habit of not thinking a thing wrong gives it the
        superficial appearance of being right. --Thomas Paine
 
Geoffrey T. Falk <gtf@math.rochester.edu> http://theorem.math.rochester.edu/
