NSW: DOCTORS REQUIRED TO USE ANAESTHESIA FOR CIRCUMCISION

AAP  16/12/96 09:39


Copyright 1996 The Australian Associated Press.  Redistribution
unauthorised.
  
   SYDNEY, Dec 16 AAP - For the first time the New South Wales Department
of Health has today told doctors throughout the state to  use anaesthesia
for male circumcision.
   The department, in a circular issued earlier this month, said:  "It is
unacceptable to perform this procedure without appropriate  anaesthesia."
   But department's policy does not affect those who carry out
circumcision for religious reasons outside the hospital system, including
people from the Jewish faith known as mohels.
   The Better Future for Our Children MP in the NSW Upper House,  Alan
Corbett, welcomed the circular as the public health system's  first
statewide policy on circumcision.
   "Newborns and infants feel pain and, in fact, may feel pain more
intensely than adults ... hence, any circumcision is an act of  extreme
cruelty if it is not performed with appropriate pain relief  before, 
during and after the procedure," Mr Corbett said in a  statement.
   He also called for the government to stop Medicare rebates for  infant
circumcisions unless performed for a medical reason.
   Mr Corbett said the majority of the 5,300 circumcisions on  children
aged under six months were performed in NSW each year for  no medical
reason.
   The department's circular of December 2 endorsed an earlier  position
paper from the Australian College of Paediatrics on  circumcision.
   The paper includes the Australasian Association of Paediatric Surgeons'
views that circumcision has no medical basis and should  not be performed
before the age of six months.
   The college's position paper said that the operation was  generally
performed with some sort of local or general anaesthesia.
   On the question of the possible benefits of the operation,  including
reduced risks of urinary tract infections and later  cancer of the penis,
the paper said: "At the present time it would  be wrong either to claim
that there are definite health benefits or  to deny that they exist."
   AAP srw/dm/adh

