SUIT TO ASK FOR EQUAL PROTECTION

The Bismarck Tribune [1-800-472-2273]---Thursday, May 2, 1996
by Rebecca Lentz

The group of people who urged passage of a bill outlawing female genital
mutilation plans to file a lawsuit in federal court claiming that the law
violates the Constitution.
Jody McLaughlin of Minot said she believes the Female Genital Mutilation
Law violates the Equal Protection Clause because it only applies to
females, not males. McLaughlin will be one of the plaintiffs. Specifically,
McLaughlin and the others want routine infant circumcision outlawed. The
laws suit will name the State of North Dakota as the defendant, McLaughlin
said.

" ( The law ) does not go far enough to protect babies of both sexes," said
McLaughlin, who asked a Fargo senator to introduce the bill. The law makes
it a Class C felony to "knowingly separate or surgically alter normal,
healthy, functioning genital tissue of a female minor." McLaughlin said
they wanted the bill to include male and females, but they couldn't find
enough sponsors.

But Dr. Ray Hippchen, a pediatrician at Mid Dakota Clinic, said male
circumcision and clitoridectomies and other mutilations of young girls'
genitalia are "vastly different procedures." "I think there are valid
objections to male circumcisions that can be made," Hippchen said, adding
male circumcision is controversial with cultural and religious
implications. "But I don't think you can link the two in the same bit of
legislation. That appeals to emotionalism. It sounds very radical to me."

Minnesota attorney Zenas Baer, who is handling the plaintiff's case,
confirmed he plans to file the case within the next two weeks but declined
to comment further. He would only say the "general theory is equal
protection."

Shelley Barker, a spokeswoman in the attorney general's office, said they
weren't aware of the lawsuit.

McLaughlin said the lawsuit developed because of the difficulty to get
agencies-including the North Dakota Medical Association and the North
Dakota Board of Medical Examiners - to address routine infant circumcision.

Cathy Rydell, executive vice president of the North Dakota Medical
Association, said the association hasn't taken a stand on routine infant
circumcision. The committee on legislative issues met Wednesday in Minot,
and circumcision was on the agenda, Rydell said. If they were to take a
stand, it wouldn't be a "philosophical position, it would be based on good
medicine."

"My opinion is it is a society issue," Rydell said. "The medical issue is a
separate issue we will be discussing."

The North Dakota Board of Medical Examiners won't prosecute physicians who
perform routine male infant circumcisions, said Rolf Sletten, executive
secretary of the board.

"What we have said is if people like Jody McLaughlin want to prohibit those
procedures, they ought to go to the Legislature and have it debated there,"
Sletten said. The board told the state Medical Association they might want
to discuss it.

McLaughlin said she filed a complaint with the Board of Medical Examiners
about a doctor who was performing female genital mutilation. Sletten said
state law specifies he can't comment on any complaint that might have been
filed.

Routine infant circumcision serves no health purpose, McLaughlin said. In
fact, she said, it's medically unnecessary and has short-term
complications, including hemorrhaging, infection and death. McLaughlin said
she didn't know how many infants die each year from circumcision but said
the estimates are around 200. Most people don't know it's not only
"contraindicated but also harmful," McLaughlin said.

"One of the long-term problems that I'm being told about is the inability
to achieve and sustain an adequate erection, "McLaughlin said.

She said she hasn't met a physician who will say routine infant
circumcision is medically necessary. Physicians tell her it's done for
social, cultural or philosophical reasons, McLaughlin said. "Since when are
physicians agents for social customs?" she asked.

