IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
FOR THE DISTRICT OF NORTH DAKOTA
SOUTHEASTERN DIVISION

Donna Fishbeck, Individually, and as Mother and Natural Guardian of Her
Infant Son, Jonathan Fishbeck; Jody McLaughlin; and Duane Voskuil, Ph.D.,
Plaintiffs,
v.
The State of North Dakota,
Defendant.

Complaint

Civil No. _________

I. PARTIES

1. Donna Fishbeck, a resident of the State of North Dakota, City of
Bismarck, is the mother and natural guardian of her son, Jonathan Fishbeck,
born on October 31, 1995, at St. Alexius Medical Center in Bismarck, North
Dakota.

2. Jody McLaughlin, a resident of Minot, North Dakota, is involved in human
rights issues, and more particularly, is involved in male and female
genital mutilation issues in the United States.

3. Duane Voskuil, Ph.D., a professor of philosophy and ethics at Bismarck
State College, is concerned with human rights and how the passage of laws
protecting only one gender from genital mutilation violates the human and
legal rights of the excluded gender.

4. The State of North Dakota passed Senate Bill 2454 codified at N.D.C.C.
12.1-36-O1, entitled: Criminal Law -- Alteration of Genitals of Female
Minor -- Penalty, on March 17, 1995, which became law August 1, 1995.

5. Senate Bill 2454 Law North Dakota 1995 provides that "any person who
knowingly separates or surgically alters normal, healthy functional genital
tissue of a female minor is guilty of a class C felony." A surgical
procedure to correct an anatomical abnormality or to remove diseased tissue
that is an immediate threat to the health of the female minor is allowed by
the criminal provision.

II. JURISDICTIONAL STATEMENT

6. This action is brought pursuant to the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments
of the United States Constitution. Jurisdiction is founded upon 28 U.S.C.
=A71331 and =A71343(a)(3). Plaintiffs further invoke the pendent jurisdictio=
n
of this Court to adjudicate state law claims.

III. BACKGROUND FACTS

7. Plaintiff Donna Fishbeck is the mother of a minor son Jonathan born on
October 31, 1995, at St. Alexius Medical Center, Bismarck, North Dakota.

8. Jonathan Fishbeck is an individual as defined by the North Dakota
Constitution, Art. I, Sec. 1, and a person as defined by the United States
Constitution and the Constitution of North Dakota.

9. Plaintiff Donna Fishbeck did not want to have her son circumcised, but
Jonathan Fishbeck's father wanted the procedure done. Physicians at the
medical center were willing to do it.

They gave no indication when questioned by Donna that the procedure is
harmful. She was led to believe that prepucectomy of a normal, healthy
foreskin was a medically and morally acceptable procedure.

10. If the law passed by the North Dakota legislature protected males from
having their genital structures separated or surgically altered, Jonathan
Fishbeck would not have had his prepuce separated from his glans penis and
surgically removed without consent.

11. Jody McLaughlin testified before the Senate Committee hearing the
Senate Bill 2454 and advocated the abolition of both male and female
genital mutilation.

12. Duane Voskuil, Ph.D., ethics professor, Bismarck State College,
appeared in person and supplied oral and written testimony for legislators
on the harm of male and female genital mutilation, pointing out that at
least one form of female circumcision, sunna, i.e., amputation of the
clitoral hood (prepuce), is less destructive to females than is male
prepuce amputation.

13. Support for the passage of a gender-neutral prohibition on separation
or surgical alteration of the genitals of minors for medically unnecessary
procedures was insufficient, and subsequently a female-only genital
mutilation bill was introduced and passed by unanimous vote in both houses
and was signed into law with support from the North Dakota Medical
Association and the North Dakota Board of Medical Examiners.

14. There was no opposition to the bill as ultimately passed.

15. In North Dakota, approximately 80% to 90% of all male infants are
routinely circumcised without benefit of medical indication. The
circumcision is done purely for cultural reasons on non-consenting,
incompetent individuals who scream in protest.

IV. THE ISSUE -- CIRCUMCISION

16. Reallege all of the factual allegations contained in the preceding
paragraphs 1 through 15.

17. Current rates of circumcision of representative countries include
Australia 15%, Canada 20%, United States 60% and the State of North Dakota
80% to 90%. In the United States alone, over 1.25 million infants annually,
more than 3,300 babies each day, 1 child every 26 seconds is subjected to
the unnecessary, painful mutilation without benefit of medical indication
or consent.

18. This actual surgery generates more than a quarter of a billion dollars
nationwide in unnecessary medical costs annually. Much of this money is tax
money paid to health care programs often in violation of explicit
statements that Medicaid will not pay for "unnecessary routine infant
circumcisions." Some estimate, when all costs are considered
(complications, reconstruction, circumcision revisions, circumcision
devices, etc.), circumcision is a one to five billion dollar a year
industry.

19. Routine male genital mutilation, as presently practiced in the United
States, began in the late l9th century to prevent masturbation. The current
rationalizations for routine infant male circumcision are purely cultural
and are not supportable by medical necessity or factual evidence. Such
rationalizations include: to make sons resemble their circumcised fathers
or peers; to supposedly improve hygiene (even though the American Academy
of Pediatrics says washing is equally effective without the inherent of
surgery); to cure phimosis (a condition that cannot be diagnosed during
infancy); to supposedly lower the incidence of male infant urinary tract
infections (though females have three to four times the number of these
infections as males and no scientific studies show this to be a significant
issue for this condition which can be treated medically); to help prevent
sexually transmitted diseases, including AIDS (unproven); and to prevent
cancer of the penis (yet Denmark with a male circumcision rate less than
1%, has a lower rate of penile cancer than the U.S.; and as many infants
die of circumcision complications as older men die of penile cancer).

20. Routine circumcision is surgery for cultural, not medical, reasons.
Routine circumcision continues in the United States because parents and
physicians have not been given adequate information regarding the structure
and function of the prepuce. Parents mistakenly believe it is a medical
issue and ask physicians for advice. Physicians who likely have also been
subjected to this ritual circumcision frequently wish to protect the status
quo and financial self-interests, and therefore, do not, or cannot give
adequate information to parents.

21. One does not need to be a medical professional to amputate male
prepuces. The North Dakota Attorney General has ignored requests to rule on
whether any parent can amputate his or her son's prepuce with impunity at
any age.

22. Parents have the right to consent to health care procedures for the
incompetent children, but not for elective surgeries for personal whims
(the removal of an ear lobe, e.g., would certainly be less damaging to a
child, and yet would certainly be a basis to prosecute a parent for child
abuse).

23. The prepuce is specialized tissue, highly innervated, richly supplied
with blood vessels, and uniquely endowed with stretch nerve receptors. The
prepuce contributes significantly to the sexual response of the intact male
which can be especially important for sexual satisfaction in the mature
male.

24. The amount of foreskin typically removed during a routine circumcision,
more accurately called, male genital mutilation, amounts to approximately
50% or more of the skin covering the average adult penile shaft. The
foreskin removed during this mutilation is approximately 12 to 15 square
inches of highly innervated tissue of the average adult male penis.

25. The infant male prepuce is normally attached to the glans penis at
birth and may not become retractable until teenage years. Infant
circumcision traumatically interrupts the natural and gradual separation of
the foreskin from the glans penis. Tearing the prepuce from the glans
penis, even when not part of an amputation, is considered child abuse by
many because it is extremely painful and there is no medical reason for
this painful procedure which harms the glans penis and can introduce
infection. Circumcision interferes with the natural anatomical development
of the penis {including that part which is not amputated), since the
circumciser tears the prepuce mucosa from the glans penis as part of the
amputation. This procedure scarifies, and eventually hardens and
desensitizes, the glans penis.

26. Routine infant male circumcision is a genital mutilation which removes
a vital, anatomical structure and functioning body part and leaves
permanent scarring of the shaft skin and the glans penis. It changes the
brain's structure by imposing pain on a primary pleasure center. This
procedure violates the physician's oath for the care of patients: She/he
must First Do No Harm.

27. The unnecessary mutilation of the genitals in the name of tradition,
custom, or any other non-pathologically related cause is not acceptable to
a conscientious health care professional. It breaches the fundamental code
of medical ethics. Children too young to give consent must be treated as
other incompetent individuals. Elective circumcision procedures should be
performed only when the individual affected can give informed consent.
Circumcisions done for medical reasons must meet the same criteria as any
amputation. If there is a question of medical necessity, the amputation
should only be done upon the appointment of a guardian ad litem and with a
court's permission.

28. All routine childhood circumcisions or separations of genital
structures are violations of fundamental human rights. It is the moral, and
often the legal duty of all, but especially professionals, to protect the
health and rights of those with little or no social power to protect
themselves. A circumcision is an assault on individual's sexuality, and a
violation of his natural right to an intact body.

V. FIRST CAUSE OF ACTION

29. Reallege all of the factual allegations contained in the preceding
paragraphs 1 through 28.

30. The North Dakota Female Genital Mutilation Legislation, N.D.C.C.
12.1-36-01, (SB 2454) violates the provisions of the United States
Constitution found in the Fourteenth Amendment and Fifth Amendment, because
it denies the infant male equal protection of laws and allows deprivation
of liberty and property and allows for the permanent injury of a minor male
without due process, while at the same time protecting females from similar
injuries.

31. The North Dakota Female Gentile Mutilation Law violates equal
protection guaranteed under the Federal Constitution because it provides
protection for females, but not males, without any rational basis for this
gender discrimination.

VI. SECOND CAUSE OF ACTION

32. Reallege all of the factual allegations contained in the preceding
paragraphs 1 through 31.

33. The passage of the Female Genital Mutilation Law (SB 2454), N.D.C.C.
12.1-36-01, by the State of North Dakota violates the North Dakota
Constitutional guarantees of equal protection in violation of Article I,
Section 1 of the North Dakota Constitution, which guarantees "all
individuals are by nature equally free and independent and have certain
inalienable rights among which are those of enjoying and defending life and
liberty."

VII. THIRD CAUSE OF ACTION

34. Reallege all of the factual allegations contained in the preceding
paragraphs 1 through 33.

35. The passage of the Female Genital Mutilation Law (SB 2454), N.D.C.C.
12.1-36-01, allows routine mutilation of the genitals of male incompetents
(i.e. all male babies) without their consent in violation of N.D.C.C.
=A712.1-05-05, inasmuch as the use of force against the incompetent child
creates serious bodily injury, disfigurement, gross degradations, and
approximately 200 deaths per year in the United States. Further, the
routine mutilation of males is not only medically unnecessary and
unnecessary for safeguarding or promoting the child's welfare, but quite
the contrary: It is medically harmful because it can impose serious
long-term physical and psychological trauma, as well as possible
hemorrhage, infection, and death.

WHEREFORE, Plaintiffs pray for judgment of the Court as follows:

1. Finding that the passage of the law codified at N.D.C.C. =A712.1-36-01 is
unconstitutional as violative of the Federal Equal Protection and Due
Process Clause of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments and is, therefore,
unconstitutional.

2. Finding that the passage of the Female Genital Mutilation Law codified
at N.D.C.C. =A712.1-36-01 violates the provisions of the North Dakota
Constitution, Article I, Section 1, and Article I, Section 23, inasmuch as
it violates the protection of individuals to be "equally free and
independent" and violates the individuals' rights to their separate
liberty, protection of their reputation, and maintenance of their
individual safety and happiness by discriminating against infant males.

3. For such other and further relief as the Court may deem just and equitabl=
e.

Dated: June 7, 1996

ZENAS BAER & ASSOCIATES

[signed]

Zenas Baer (#120595)
Attorney for Plaintiffs
331 6th St., Box 249
Hawley, MN 56549
(218) 483-3372
