misc.kids #267469 (0 + 18 more)                           \-(?)--(1)
From: RSXD10A@prodigy.com (Martin Novoa)        
[1] Re: Pro-circ delusions                      --(?)--(?)--(?)--(1)
Date: Fri Apr 19 11:04:12 GMT-0400 GMT-0400     --(?)--(1)--(1)+-(1)
+     1996                                                     |-[1]
Organization: Prodigy Services Company  1-800-                 \-(1)
+             PRODIGY
Lines: 152
Distribution: world
X-Newsreader: Version 1.2




Before I get too far along in this discussion, I want to take a moment 
and tell Rob Strom that I respect your method of argument.  I have lurked 
in the newsgroups for some time, but 99% of the anti-circ [sic] postings are 
grounded in such ignorance of anatomy and history or so poorly written 
that they are not worthy of reply.  I have devoted a couple of hours a 
day for 14 years of my life to careful study of the anatomy and sociology 
of circumcision, both neonatal and post-neonatal.  I have written and 
lectured extensively on the subject to groups as diverse as intactivists, 
expecting parents, and university anatomy classes.  You are a worthy 
"opponent;"  the others generally are not.


[Your original note is gone and my browser does not have a means to 
redisplay it, so if I may I'd like to quote from a printed copy I have]

On 17 April 1996 Rob Strom wrote:

> I think the use of the word sacrament is misleading here,
 
I chose the word sacrament for precisely the reasons you cite.  The 
Encyclopedia Judaica chose to use the word sacrament, and its meaning 
applies:  this is not a life-status altering rite.  Most of the readers 
of this thread are likely Gentiles, many of whom incorrectly believed 
that infant circumcision is an admission rite to Judaism, much like the 
baptism is for Christian religions.  I post this here so people 
understand that while all branches of Judaism (including Humanistic?  I 
don't know) expect ritual circumcision of newborn boys on the 8th day, 
absolutely no branch of Judaism accepts simple circumcision (such as non-
ritual or non-8th day but for good reason) as fulfillment of this 
obligation.  More importantly, circumcision in no way "makes one a Jew."  
Period.  All the intact Russian Jewish emigres are no less Jews than you 
are.


> Maimonides was the product of his time and place.  As rabbis go, he was 

> more negative about sex in general,

Yes, Rabbi Moises Maimonides reflected the mores of his day, which were 
sexually conservative.  My point, however, was that he demonstrated a 
rare truthfulness and honesty about the damage that circumcision does.  I 
cannot bear to listen to another Jew rave about how much cleaner, 
healthier, and physically superior circumcision makes him.  The medical 
facts suggest exactly the opposite.  The whole point of my original post 
was:  is there something wrong with acknowledging this harm, while also 
acknowledging that we must do it out of service to God?  Circumcision is 
a sacrifice, but apparently one that no one today is willing to confront 
and admit.

>> I don't have a problem with this -- circumcision is supposed to be a
>> horrible thing among the Jews, a terrible destruction, a sacrifice to 
God
>> of normal sexuality and function as a demonstration of faith.  It is 
our 
>> substitute for Abraham's aborted murder of his son Ishmael at God's
>> command, in addition to being an outward sign of the covenant God 
made
>> with Abraham.

> [I assume you meant to write "Isaac", not "Ishmael"]

You are absolutely right that this should have been Isaac.  I posted past 
midnight and was too tired to catch my typo.  My apologies.  Nevertheless,
 I stand my my theory (and it's mine, not Rambam's).  I argue that the 
meaning of circumcision as a sign of the covenant was not revealed to 
Jews until God asked Abraham to sacrifice his son Isaac; then, it became 
clear that each time we circumcise our sons, it symbolizes "a little 
death" of part of our sons.  And a little part of us, as parents and 
family, dies also out of sacrifice to God.  It is entirely consistent, 
unlike this nutty mitzvah idea that's come up in the last few centuries.  
There is no indication that Abraham and Sarah served cake and told off-
color jokes at Isaac's bris.


>> I am disgusted when I watch the joy of the menfolk at a bris -- what 
>> pathetic denial.

> Do the "womenfolk" at a bris behave differently?

In my experience at 10 or so brises, yes, the "womenfolk" absolutely do 
behave differently.  The majority of the males I've observed express a 
morbid fascination and exhuberance over the impending surgery and screams 
of the child, while the women cringe and ask themselves why this has to 
be done (when they're even allowed in the room).  As Jewish scholar 
Miriam Pollock has eloquently argued, in an intensely patriarchal 
religion with MATERNAL lineage the defining factor, post-partum 
circumcision is a forceful way to destroy the mother-child bond, wounding 
both and bringing the child clearly into the camp of similarly wounded 
men.  A significant shift in bonding.

> I don't agree that modern circumcision dates only to 140CE.  Even if it 
did,
> that still makes it a 1,850-year-old tribal custom.

Sorry you didn't know this history before.  In 140 C.E. the bris milah 
was modified to include two steps beyond the initial "nick" or small cut 
that was practiced for nearly 4,000 years.  These two steps were Periah 
and Mezizah.  In Periah, the mohel uses a sharpened thumbnail or other 
instrument to tear the delicate, adherent infant foreskin off the glans 
to which it is naturally still fused.  This effectively destroys the 
proper function of both the foreskin and glans.  When all mucous membrane 
has been separated, the foreskin tissue is pulled through a Mogen clamp 
and sliced off.  The resulting scar, then, is everything from the 
circular cut to the tip of the glans.  Yes, your glans is effectively one 
large scar.  In Mezizah, the mohel is supposed to take the freshly 
circumcised infant penis in his mouth and gently suck away the blood.  
Following several noted cases of TB being passed this way in the 18th 
century, some mohelim changed to sucking the blood from the penis through 
a glass straw.

Again, the point is that the original circumcision commanded by God and 
practiced by the Jews for nearly 4,000 years (except for those 
generations, around the time of Nebuchadnezzar, when Jews did not 
circumcise at all) involved a small cut that did NOT tear the fused 
foreskin from the glans.  This is a modern, radical modification ordered 
by a group of men.  The ancient Greeks extolled the foreskin and 
emphasized its beauty by stretching it to new lengths.  Young Jewish 
athletes in the Hellenic period also tried stretching their half-
foreskins, which the rabbis frowned on.  But it was those athletes 
desperate for long foreskins who actually cut off the GLANS penis in 
order to make the foreskin look longer who caught the condemnation of the 
rabbis.  Some of these young men hemorrhaged and/or suffered septicemia; 
a few died.  This was enough to force the rabbinical council to take 
action and order that the drastic, radical stage of Periah be added to 
the otherwise fairly benign circumcision.


As you can see, there is a lot of history to circumcision that is not 
routinely taught to Jews or to the general public.  I posit that this is 
part of the huge denial/disinformation campaign that goes on to permit 
the continued practice of a harmful, misunderstood, outdated practice.  
Neonatal circumcision persists as a tribal identification for Americans 
and Jews, but its scrutiny and replacement are long overdue for both 
groups.  For Americans it no longer serves its original puritanical anti-
masturbation purpose, and for Jews it has deviated way too far from God's 
simple commandment.



"The purpose of Jewish existence is not to eat Jewish food, or tell 
Jewish jokes, or use Yiddish words.  It is to fight evil in the world.  
It is a source of deep pain to me to recognize how few people know this.
"

Dennis Prager and Rabbi Telushkin
The Nine Questions People Ask about Judaism
