DECLARATION OF THE FIRST INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM ON CIRCUMCISION


We recognize the inherent right of all human beings to an intact
body.  Without religious or racial prejudice, we affirm this
basic human right.

We recognize the foreskin, clitoris and labia are normal,
functional body parts.

Parents and/or guardians do not have the right to consent to the
surgical removal or modification of their children's normal
genitalia.

Physicians and other health-care providers have a responsibility
to refuse to remove or mutilate normal body parts.

The only persons who may consent to medically unnecessary
procedures upon themselves are the individuals who have reached
the age of consent (adulthood), and then only after being fully
informed about the risks and benefits of the procedure.

We categorically state that circumcision has unrecognized
victims.

In view of the serious physical and psychological consequences
that we have witnessed in victims of circumcision, we hereby
oppose the performance of a single additional unnecessary
foreskin, clitoral, or labial amputation procedure.

We oppose any further studies which involve the performance of
the circumcision procedure upon unconsenting minors.  We support
any further studies which involve identification of the effects
of circumcision.

Physicians and other health-care providers do have a
responsibility to teach hygiene and the care of normal body parts
and explain their normal anatomical and physiological development
and function throughout life.

We place the medical community on notice that it is being held
accountable for misconstruing the scientific database available
on human circumcision in the world today.

Physicians who practice routine circumcisions are violating the
first maxim of medical practice, "PRIMUM NON NOCERE," "First, Do
No Harm," and anyone practicing genital mutilation is violating
Article V of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human
Rights:  "NO ONE SHALL BE SUBJECTED TO TORTURE OR TO CRUEL,
INHUMAN OR DEGRADING TREATMENT..."
-----------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------------
Adopted by the General Assembly
First International Symposium on Circumcision
March 1-3, 1989, Anaheim, California

NOCIRC
P.O. Box 2512
San Anselmo, CA
94960
