Le Figaro, 21 February 1996

Algerian Convicted

The Rite of Circumcision Put in a Bad Light

This Religious Practice is Better Controlled by Jews than by Muslims

For the first time in the annals of justice, a Muslim circumciser
was prosecuted by the French judicial system because of his ritual
activities.
 Mohand Berkache, a 66 year-old Algerian, was convicted Monday by
the tribunal of Saint-Etienne to six months in prison with a fine
of 5,000 francs for "intentional armed violence."  The "arm" used
by this humble pensioner was a simple pair of scissors with rounded
tips.

Following his surgeries, several families of Turkish origin living
in Puy-de Dome and in l'Isere had to take their children to the
hospital.  Five of them, between the ages of 3 and 7, presented
with abnormal hemorrhage. The Department of Social Services and
the physicians in attendance concluded in their report that there
had occurred "a major mutilation of the penis with a significant
loss of skin and blood."  Mohand Berkache was investigated and
barred from practice in September 1994.  In the course of the trial,
the expert witness qualified his acts as "a barbaric practice and
an act of savagery."

"There was no intention to harm on the part of my client," explained
the lawyer for the convicted, M. Tahar Smiai, who plans to appeal
the conviction.
 "Circumcision is not a barbaric act.  There can be complications,
but in this case, they were not so bad.  Muslim families often
prefer to go to a man of faith rather than to a hospital."

The sentence handed down by the tribunal of Saint-Etienne raises
the question of controlling circumcision in France.  Where does
religion end and where does medicine begin?  The rules are less
compulsive in Islam than in Judaism.
 In the Arabic-Muslim world, circumcision, which is a ritual and
obligatory act for boys attaining puberty, has for a long time
been practiced outside the realm of the hospital and instead by
barbers and hairdressers.

In France, however, the act is considered by law to be a surgical
operation.
 It must be performed by a physician.  If the physician is a layman,
he is assisted by a religious personage.  "The Muslim community
is poorly informed,"  says the rector of the mosque of Paris, Dr.
Baubakeur. "The circumciser of Saint-Etienne remains within the
tradition, but he is not a surgeon.  In this case, they sanction
is symbolic."

Among the Jews, the act is reserved for the "Mohel,"  a certified
religious personage who, in most cases, has medical competence.

Alexandrine BOUILHET

[Translated by Frederick Hodges]
