UTI's:

Two other publications back up Dr. Altschul's finding that, "I found not a
single confirmed case of UTI in a normal male infant.  All of the confirmed
cases occurred in infants who had clear-cut urinary birth defects."

The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services pamphlet, "Understanding
Urinary Tract Infection" says, "UTI's are rarely seen in boys and young men.
UTI's may occur in infants who are born with abnormalities in their urinary
tract."

"Urinary Tract Infection in Childhood, " [Infect Urol 8(4), 111, 114-120,
1995]:  "60% of children with UTI's have anatomic abnormalities in their
urinary tracts....  In older children, UTI's are significantly more common
in girls and become as much as 50 times more common in girls by the age of
five years.  0.3% to 1.2% of all infants will develop symptomatic UTI's
during the first year of life."   If we remove the girls from the .3% to
1.2%, remove 60% of that remainder (with anatomic abnormalities), then
remove the circumcised boys from that number, we would be circumcising about
2,000 boys to keep one from having an infection that can easily be treated!

Question:  Do the circumcision promoters actually believe that circumcision
will cure congenital birth defects?

Question:  Why don't the circumcisors go after the tissue surrounding the
opening of the short urinary tract of infant girls (clitoral foreskin, labia
minora and labia majora) due to such a higher incidence of UTI's?  Haven't
they calculated the profits?  Or are they having problems concocting
convincing excuses?

Penile Cancer:

Tim H. sent me a BJM article on penile cancer in an uncircumised population
(Demmark 1943-1990).  Same incidence among the 98.4% intact Danes found
among the mostly circumcised U.S. population, yet the researchers again
quote the unscientific 1932 Wolbarst "study."  As we know, the Maden et al
case/control study has exposed the Wolbarst fraud, but is rarely cited  by
any other researchers on the subject.  There seems to be one item that has
not been considered by the researchers of yesterday or today - that all
tissue is at risk for carcinomas, so of course the foreskin would be at
risk, too (Maden found 17% of carcinomas on the foreskin, 83% at other
sites), therefore, the entire penis would have to be amputated to prevent 5
out of 6 penile cancers.  

It appears that some circumcised men with neoplasms on their penis have been
told by urologists (and other physicians) that there this nothing to worry
about since they are circumcised and can't get penile cancer and are left
untreated.  Hopefully, some informed physician will take it seriously and
finally take a biopsy before the cancer is in its final phase or an autopsy
discovers the cancer he couldn't have!  The promoters of the hoax that
circumcision is a preventative against penile cancer may be causing
unnecessary losses of the entire penis, and deaths, because some doctors
have been convinced of the hoax, too.  

Question:  Would the removal of the nipples be a preventative for breast
cancer?  Makes just as much sense.

Circumcision Jokes:

I remember circumcision jokes in the `50's and `60's.  Toward the end of the
10th or 11th grade someone asked me if I would like a job for the summer and
of course I did.  "They are hiring at the hospital."  "Whats the job?"  "In
the circumcision ward.  Pays $1.25 an hour plus tips."  Being intact among
mostly circumcised peers and circumcised friends, many jokes like this hurt
very much.  They were validating circumcision with humor and trivializing
the surgery and the effects, making it a "normal" infant procedure and the
"normal" way a penis should look and function.  These jokes had an impact
about as great as other detrimental comments that helped lead me to believe
that I may be inferior in the physical and sexual aspects of my being and
that circumcision, perhaps, might be a good thing after all.  I am very
thankful that I became educated and aware of how wonderful a natural penis
is before I did something drastic and irreversible.  My gratitude knows no
words to amply express the feelings.  I hated those jokes and trivializing
the soul sickness of circumcision and still do.  Humor is often utilized as
a powerful, hidden force in promoting any evil intentions, just as the sick
ethnic, racial, regional, or sex oriented jokes or caricatures and name
calling have in achieving desired results. 

"Well," says the doctor, "We have to rob from Peter to pay Paul."  All of
these sick jokes included MD's and hospitals.  Although there were some
Jewish families in town, I had never heard of a mohel and the jokes seemed
to be just fine and repeated by all the folks.  Now, when "mohel" is
inserted for "doctor"  there is indignation and charges of anti-semitism if
told by a gentile!  However, the only times I have heard these jokes with
the mohel inserted is when they are told by Jews.  There are few non-Jews
who know what a mohel is.

I hope I am not perceived as anti-semitic in expressing the following
thoughts, but Mormons flourish after discarding polygomy and other religions
have likewise ceased certain outdated and destructive practices and made
great headway in their following.  I don't care if we are talking about
taking young boys and holding them down and circumcising them in Muslim
areas, doctors of any locale or religion tearing, crushing and chopping off
the foreskins of restrained babies in hospitals, or mohels doing the same in
homes.  It is wrong, wrong, wrong.  It is time to put this attrocity in the
history books, and however I am perceived in trying to make this happen is
beyond my control.  I have tried to educate through facts the truth in the
matter and be low-keyed when that works, more enthusiastic when that works,
gentle and kind most of the time.  Some folks are more defensive than
others, some are more righteous than others.  No one has the right to
another's body parts.  The Sacramento Bee alert just happens to focus on the
mohel, jokes, and the Brit Milah today.
  
At least some of the doctors were mislead into actually believing they were
performing a surgical procedure that would be of medical benefit to the male
back in those days and it was a minor part of his practice.  This is quite
different.  That mohel in the article says, "A circumcision is a spiritual,
joyful occasion - one of the major milestones of a Jewish man's life."
Maybe I'm wierd, but to me spirituality means the immaterial, i.e., love,
acceptance, gratitude, humility, tolerance, compassion, patience, faith...,
not the premeditated pain and suffering of an infant through a primitive and
barbaric procedure performed "in the name of spirituality."  Joyful for
whom?  I wonder how many baby boys smiled at the mohel during and after this
joyful experience or remember him fondly when he finds out just what was
done to him.  Milestones of a Jewish man's life?  He is a "man" at eight
days?  I thought milestones in life were occasions and events known to that
person, that he took a conscious and a willing part, and played an active
role, that the individual achieved through his own efforts, work and
choices.  Circumcision is a community milestone.

Mohels are exempt from laws, as the practice is a "protected religious
activity?"  The Freedom of Religion?  Where is that infant's protection?
What happened to his Freedom of Religion?  It was just taken from him at the
ripe old age of 8 (days).  No human being is "born" a Catholic, Methodist,
Jew, Buddhist, Muslim, etc.   Male or female, yes.  Caucasian, Negro,
Oriental, yes.  A Christian or Jew?  No.  Born into a family which will try
to mold him to fit into their religious observations?  Yes.  This is called
a teaching and learning process, not the process of body part removal.  This
is not educating, it is promoting a social dis-ease.

Question:  What are the Jewish women's milestones?  I am not going to get
into that arena, but you all probably know that many of the "laws" in this
regard that have been discarded.  But circumcision?  NEVER!!

Question:  Is circumcision an obsessive compulsion?  Must be, it abhors
reason and insists on exposure and acceptance regardless of means employed
to reach the desired ends.  What is the conveyance?  I looked through old
and newer documents from the patent office from the Kessler device, Gomco
Clamp, Sheldon Clamp, Mogen Clamp, electrocautery devices to burn off the
foreskin, etc.  These are the devices to achieve the end result and give it
a medical flare of new technique.  I am not going to get in to the
inventors.  Who have been the outspoken promoters through these years?
I am not going to list names here, either, but there is enough blame to go
through the entire contents of the North American "melting pot."   

Question:  Has the bottom line in promoting circumcision in North America
(since Dr. Freud's observation that the core of anti-semitism is the
practice of circumcision) since the 1930's been to convince all families to
alter their sons to "look" the same by using ulterior motives?  Is it more
of a real fear of an obvious physical difference?   I can see where such a
real fear could reasonably exist among Jews in light of the atrocities of a
part of the 20th century and perhaps there was the choice of ending the
practice or convincing everyone else to join in.  I don't know.  I would
like some feed-back on that question.  The use of lies and misinformation
seem to spark some reasonable suspicions.

Articles on Female Genital Mutilation"

Questions:  How much different is MGM than FGM?  Can the former be
legitimized by expressing only the horrors of the latter?  Does the greater
loss of a leg amputation somehow trivialize the amputaion of the foot
sufficiently enough to rationalize a justification or validation of foot
removal?  (Or binding?)  "He just lost a foot.  She lost her whole leg!"
K. Derifield


