Quotations and Comments by Some North Dakotans since 1992
Regarding the Ritual of Routine Infant Circumcision
Compiled  by Duane Voskuil, Ph.D., 1/96
Bismarck State College Philosophy and Ethics Instructor

Physicians

Rhonda Ketterling, M. D., Rugby physician, former Chair of the ND Board of
Medical Examiners (NDBME) and Medical Director for U.S. Healthcare in ND,
in a letter, 11/ 20/ 92, to Duane Voskuil: "I sympathize with your desire
to have infant circumcision become a thing of the past, . . ." She wrote
further, "You will not get the medical profession to overwhelmingly alter
its practice by coming on with an accusation of child abuse and/or sexual
abuse....your best bet in this program [to stop routine infant
circumcision] is that of education, not only of the general public, but of
physicians...[and to] get insurance companies not to reimburse for
circumcision...[since] this is not a medically necessary procedure." In a
phone conversation taped with permission by Jody McLaughlin, 1993, she also
said that giving consent for surgery forms to parents to sign, who do not
ask for them, could be considered solicitation for elective surgery.

Robert Wentz, M.D., pediatrician and former State Health Officer, now
Deputy Insurance Commissioner: "Time has come to stop the practice of
routine infant circumcision," He wrote further "that the purported medical
indications are outweighed by risks and disadvantages and that
circumcisions represent an unnecessary health care cost." Letter to Duane
Voskuil, 10/1/92.

Roger Allen, M.D., neonatologist, Minot, during an interview on KMOT TV,
November 1992: "Parents have usually made a firm decision [whether or not
to circumcise] before they ever talk to me. Their decisions are 95% based
on emotions and 5% based on fact...There is no compelling reason to do a
circumcision, but on the other hand, there is no compelling reason not to."
He repeated essentially the same words again during a TV interview, May
1994. [See Janet Wentz' appropriate response below under "Government
Officials."]

Craig Shoemaker, M.D., Director of Neonatal Services and Chairman,
Department of Pediatrics, Fargo Clinic, MeritCare during a phone
conversation: "You're right. We only circumcise healthy babies."  He also
agreed that the medical reasons for routine circumcision are not
compelling, and also wrote, 11/3/92: "I personally do not feel that I have
the right to decide for my patients [parents or newborn?] whether or not
they should be circumcised." [Many people have a hard time seeing the
patient--the infant--as the patient. Elective surgeries must be elected by
the patient to be morally justified.]

Ron H. Miller, M.D., pediatrician, Fargo Clinic, letter to Duane Voskuil,
9/26/92: "What risk is acceptable when one is tampering with something that
is normal?...Physicians in general are very divided on this....although
most pediatricians take a fairly moderate if not anticircumcision approach,
most urologists and surgeons in the united States, even ones who trained in
Canada, seem to take a position advocating circumcision." He also tried
several years ago to get BlueCross BlueShield to stop covering it.

Shari L. Orser, M.D., Ob-Gyn, Q&R/Women's Health Center and UND medical
school graduate in a letter to Duane Voskuil, 11/24/92: "I personally am
opposed to circumcision....I feel that the evidence is not strong enough to
support circumcision as a routine and that the practice should be
discontinued."

Shari L. Orser, M.D. Chair, Department of OB/GYN, Medcenter One: "It was
felt that educating the parents should be the key focus, and the members of
the Department of OB/GYN have agreed to make a concerted effort to provide
parents with information regarding [the risks of] circumcision. However, if
after reviewing the information the parents wish to proceed with the
procedure, we will abide by their wishes, and they will be required to
provide the hospital with a signed informed consent." Letter, 10/5/94.

Alan Lindemann, M.D., Ob-Gyn, Fargo, November 1992: "If we were to take
routine infant circumcision outside the present circumstances, it would
clearly be child abuse....Parents should be forced to watch a circumcision
before they agree to one....I was taught at UND that it didn't hurt."

Dennis J. Lutz, M.D. Chairman UND Medical School Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology in a letter to Duane Voskuil, 10/30/92: "Obviously there are
design problems with some of the studies,...[but] Enough studies linking
STD's [sexually transmitted diseases] to uncircumcised males have been
published to give rise to the often repeated admonition 'it doesn't matter
what you do with your sons, but don't let your daughters sleep with
uncircumcised males.'" [I find Dennis Lutz and George Johnson, below,
fellow faculty members of the ND University System, to hold intellectually
embarrassing positions.]

Charles Severn, M.D., St. Alexius and Robert Grassy, M.D., formerly of
Medcenter One, both told Duane Voskuil in phone conversations, fall of
1992, that the surgery is not medically indicated, though they do them
because the parents want them.

Daniel Grover, MD. in a letter to the Bismarck Tribune, 1/22/93: "I worked
in Panama as a doctor for 20 years and saw many, many complications of
foreskins not being circumcised....All of these [cancer, adhesions, urinary
retention, phimosis and surgical infections] are avoided by the simple
process of circumcision. The urologist [who?] informs me that AIDS is more
likely to be transmitted to and from non-circumcised men; and urinary tract
infections are more likely to occur also." [Amputating part of one's penis
is not "simple," that is, insignificant, and does not decrease sexually
transmitted diseases. As for UTIs, even the questionable retropective
studies by Thomas Wiswell show a hundred circumcisions would be required to
prevent one UTI, and still girls are four times more likely to get a UTI
than boys. What about the many "botched jobs," even death, and the loss of
half the penis' sensuous nerve endings?]

Robert Roswick, M.D. and Jeffrey Smith, M.D., Family Medical Center,
Bismarck, in office visit conversations, 1993: "Routine infant
circumcisions are not done for medical reasons."

Thomas W. Mausbach, M.D., former ND Chapter President, American Academy of
Pediatrics in a letter to Rhonda Ketterling, Chair of the ND Board of
Medical Examiners, 1/26/93: "...I think the important issue is that the
total complete scientific evidence is just not complete yet [it is for most
people in the world, and this is the very reason for a moratorium]....The
key issue is that these individuals who are against circumcisions have no
significant scientific evidence to justify a moratorium against
circumcisions in our state. Personally I do not feel they are going to go
very far because of these public and social issues regarding circumcisions
in the United States. I guess it is better to have them standing on the
soapbox regarding this issue than something that could be a more
detrimental issue for medicine. Sorry I could not help you any further but
I think philosophically these people do not have much ground to stand on."
[Even the national AAP does not recommend routine infant circumcision. He
confuses "medicine" with "health." Most MD's do not agree with his view.
Even Rhonda Ketterling ,to whom he is writing, does not think routine
circumcision is sound medical practice.]

Robert Pathroff, M.D., urologist, Bismarck, ND, verbally, 6/94: "Routine
circumcisions cannot be justified on medical grounds."

George Magnus Johnson, M.D., Chairman, Department of Pediatrics, UND School
of Medicine in a letter to Duane Voskuil, 9/7/92: "Urologists stoutly
maintain that cancer prevention (squamous cell carcinoma of the penile
foreskin) is one of the major reasons for circumcisions. This is a reason
above and beyond prevention of urinary infections in the males."  [More
babies die from circumcision than old men do from penile cancer (about 200
per year), and Wiswell's UTI correlation's have been shown to be
systematically flawed and statistically trivial even if true. 100 healthy
babies would need surgery to prevent one treatable UTI. Not all, or even
most (hardly any in Europe and Asia), urologists will put their credentials
on the line to defend this practice. See Robert Pathroff above.]

Jon Rice, M.D., ND State Health Officer: "This [routine infant
circumcision] is not a medical issue."  He elaborated in a conversation
with Jody McLaughlin, July 1993, that his reluctance to deal with the
circumcision issue, was that he was mainly interested in medical issues,
not health issues, because even though he is the State Health Officer, he
is a physician first.

Wes Borowski, MD, Rugby in a letter to the Minot Daily News, 1/14/95:
"...To describe the foreskin as an essential [body] part would be reaching
beyond the boundaries of common sense. I agree that infant circumcison
cannot be strictly defined as medically essential." [What other healthy
body parts are not essential? Is the female prepuce, e.g., any more
essential?]

Joseph Cleary, MD, Medical Consultant for ND Medicaid said Medicaid does
not cover circumcision unless there is a medical indication, which includes
phimosis [prepuce is too tight] and balanitis [an infection of the prepuce
or glans penis]. He said these two conditions can happen the first day
after delivery. 1/96 [Phimosis is not a condition diagnosable in newborns,
and balanitis is a highly unlikely condition for  neonates.]

Insurance Companies

Medicaid's present policy statement for ND: "Effective for services
provided on or after November 1, 1986, the North Dakota Medical Assistance
Program will provide payment for circumcisions only when there is
documented evidence that the circumcision was performed due to medical
necessity. Routine circumcisions that are not medically indicated will no
longer be reimbursable through the Medical Assistance Program." And
further, Davis Zentner, Medicaid Director, offered the following policy
statement from the ND Department of Humans Services: "Medicaid pays for
circumcisions only when they are medically necessary. Our medical
consultant [Joseph Cleary, MD] reviews all claims with circumcisions and
payment is allowed for the diagnoses phimosis and balanitis. If other
diagnoses are used, the medical necessity must be documented and approved
by the medical consultant. Routine circumcision for newborns are not a
covered service. Providers should notify the family before the procedure is
performed that Medicaid will not cover routine circumcisions." Emphasis
added. ```[Phimosis and balanitis can hardly ever be a diagnosis for a
newborn or even an infant, since whether the prepuce is too tight
(phimosis) cannot be known until it physiologically separates from the
glans, often not until teen years; and very few babies, especially
neonates, could have infection of the glans or prepuce (balanitis or
posthistis).]

 Julie Weaver, Vice President Planning, Development and Benefit
Administration, in a letter to Jody McLaughlin, 11/23/92: "Regarding
circumcisions-We [the Contract Administration Committee of BlueCross
BlueShield of ND] consulted with other Plans and The American Academy of
Pediatrics. The majority of these entities do not have an established
policy regarding circumcision.... There is recognition by these parties
that this [i.e., routine infant prepuce amputation] is an elective service.
Board action taken in 1987 in response to this issue provided that payment
should continue to be available for circumcisions, based on individual
choice [sic], in response to the market demand for this covered service."
[Emphasis added. Letter to Jody McLaughlin, 11/23/92, from Julie Weaver.]

Julie Weaver in a letter 1/16/95: "I admire your dedication to the issue
you address....there will be no change in our policy or benefit
provisions...[based] on much the same criteria noted in the letter from Dr.
Fitzpatrick [namely to pay for some elective surgeries requested by
consenting patients, like tubal ligations and vasectomies]. While we
support efforts to educate the general public on circumcision so that
thoughtful and informed decisioins may be made regarding this elective
procedure, we are not seeking a visible role in that process at this
time...[so we] request that any reference to Blue Cross Blue Shield of
North Dakota be deleted." [Infant circumcision is forced upon nonconsenting
patients, and so does not fit the analogies BlueShield gives to justify
paying for it.]

ND Public Employees Retirement System Group Health Plan (PERS), July 1,
1993, underwritten and administered by BlueCross BlueShield of North
Dakota: "You [North Dakota Public Employees] are not covered for:
nonmedically necessary circumcision for newborns."

Nurses & Professors of Nursing

Sister Mary Margaret Mooney, P.B.V.M, R.N., Professor and Chair, Department
of Nursing, University of Mary: "I used to work with a physician who would
ask a mother whether she wanted to mutilate her son. He never did any
circumcisions."  She also said the practice continues [to a large extent]
because of the financial incentives. Conversation, 1992.

Connie Kalanek, MSN, RNC, Associate Professor, Medcenter College of
Nursing,: "I am certainly supportive of efforts to try to stop routine
circumcision. I have always regarded this procedure as repulsive and a
painful experience for the neonate. I agree that the literature does not
support routine circumcision of the male. It truly represents an
unnecessary health care cost."  Letter, 10/22/92.

Arlene Mack , R.N., Vice President Medcenter One, Support Services. "We
will inform the parents of the risks [of circumcision]." Phone
conversation, 10/3/94.

BSC student and Bismarck nurse: "I find it very hard to believe that
people, including the medical profession, have been so blind to the fact
that male infant circumcision is child abuse. As a student nurse I was
taught that these babies feel no pain. How stupid! These doctors taught us
this! These poor babies are swaddled on a restraint board and the foreskin
torn away and cut off--for what? It makes me very angry to think that we as
nurses, parents and the general public have been so misled."

Government & Education Officials
(Also See Those Who Are Physicians  and Professors)

Gladys Cairns, Director Child Protective Services, State Capitol: "When one
considers what is done to the child, it is hard not to consider this child
abuse," verbally while extending an invitation to Duane Voskuil in October
1992 to address, the Alliance for Sexual Abuse Prevention and Treatment,
ASAPT, a statewide group of professionals from many areas concerned with
sexual child abuse.

Janet Wentz, Republican State Legislator, Minot: "If there is no compelling
reason to do a circumcision, that is a compelling reason not to do one,"
verbally November 1992, responding to Roger Allen's KMOT TV comments of
November 1992 (above).

Sandra Holbrook, Ph.D., Director of Equal Opportunity, NDSU in a letter to
Duane Voskuil, 8/2/93: "Thanks for your letter and for sharing the
information regarding various types of sexual [genital] mutilation. This is
obviously a significant gender issue...."

Mother and member of ND Board of Social Work Examiners: "My doctor told me
circumcision was necessary to be clean and prevent infection, and besides,
the military will do it anyway."

State Legislator: "I took my uncircumcised son to the pediatrician for his
first checkup. He ripped the foreskin back while my son screamed; I felt
sick. When we came back to the clinic for the next checkup, he started
crying. I took my son and left, and never went back."

State Representative Cathy Rydell, Executive Director, ND Medical
Association and ND Hospital Association: "When I first worked at St.
Alexius, my office was right next to the circ room. I can still remember
the babies' screams." Conversation, 11/92.

Spokeswoman for the ND Committee to Prevent Child Abuse, appointed by the
Governor: "It [circumcision] is an issue that is being discussed, but the
national level has not yet taken a position, and we tend to follow them."
Conversation, 1994..

Russell Thane,  Chair, ND Senate Human Services Committee to Duane Voskuil
after the committee voted unanimously to recommend passage of SB2454, the
first FGM bill to become law: "Thank you for bringing this issue [genital
mutilation] to our attention. We needed to deal with this, but it is hard
for us to do it."

North Dakota SB2454 , initiated by Jody McLaughlin and Duane Voskuil,
sponsored by Senators
		Scherber, Mathern and Watne and Representatives Kelsh and Margaos, passed
by the ND 	legislature, 3/95 unanimously with backing from the AMA and the
North Dakota Medical Association:
Section 1. Surgical alteration of the genitals of females minors - Penalty
- Exception.
1.  Except as provided in subsection 2, any person who knowingly separates
or surgically alters normal, healthy genital tissue of a female minor is
guilty of a class C felony.
2.  A surgical operation is not a violation of this section if a licensed
medical practitioner performs the operation to correct an anatomical
abnormality or to remove diseased tissue that is an immediate threat to the
health of the minor.
3.  In applying subsection 2, any belief that the operation is required as
a matter of custom, ritual, or standard of practice may not be taken into
consideration.

Attorneys

Roger J. Minch, Attorney, Fargo, letter, 9/27/92: "The law does not allow
one to mutilate another without consent, and the law, on its face, cannot
discriminate between the sexes. However, the law often blindly follows
custom and usage without much reflection."  He was responding in a to a
question about the legalities of amputating a healthy prepuce without
consent and whether a parent or physicians could do the same thing to a
female.

Thomas A. Mayer, Assistant Attorney General of North Dakota, 1/12/93: "In
connection with routine male infant circumcisions, the criminal elements of
assault are lacking. There is no purpose to intentionally or knowingly
cause bodily injury. Thus, criminal culpability is absent [for the
physician]. It is assumed there is informed consent to the surgery.
	"'Parents, guardians, and custodians are authorized to consent to health
care on behalf of children.' N.D.C.C. Sec. 23-11-13."
	"Circumcision may also be performed for religious or cultural reasons. In
this respect, it may be more akin to elective plastic surgery for cosmetic
purposes. Arguably, such surgery does not in many instances serve any
medical [i.e. health care] need. This fact would not warrant reporting
elective cosmetic surgery under N.D.C.C. Sec. 43-17-41. Presently in our
culture a routine male infant circumcision does not violate any North
Dakota criminal statute." Emphasis added. Mayer was responding to questions
(though not to "be considered as a formal legal position of this office")
about culpability of physicians (and others) who perform non-medically
indicated surgery on non-consenting  male or female children. [He does not
make clear how a surgery that does not "serve any medical need," and which
is not elected by the patient, can be legally forced on a nonconsenting
individual. Is he also saying in the first paragraph that a physician can
remove or alter any body part on children if a parent signs a consent
form?]

Heidi Heitkamp, Attorney General, State of ND, after a talk at the
Unitarian Universalist fellowship, 1994, where she outlined her work to
prevent child abuse and violent children: "It won't do any good talking to
me about it [routine infant circumcision]."  [She was asked whether the
violence of cirucmcision could be one factor in violent children, since it
is common knowledge that those who are violated, violate others.]

Rolf P. Sletten, Commission Secretary, responding to Ramona Goheen's formal
complaint (see below) that Manuel Neto, M.D., injured her son's genitals
and wanted to circumcise him even thought he had hypospadies, a reason not
to circumcise: "This is to advise you that the Commission on Medical
Competency has completed its investigation regarding your experience with
Dr. Neto....In this case the Commission has determined that the
circumstances do not give rise to a disciplinary action under current North
Dakota law." Letter, 10/3/94.

Religious Leaders

Robert Lynne, Bishop ELCA, in an interview fall 1992: "The Lutheran Church
has no rite of circumcision."

 John F. Kinney, former Bishop Bismarck Diocese, who chairs a national
committee to investigate sexual abuse by priests, said in a phone
conversation, fall 1992: "The Roman Catholic Church has taken no stand on
circumcision."

Bismarck minister: "People don't ask pastors about circumcision. The
doctors have become society's high priests." Conversation, 1992.

Educators

Duane Voskuil, Ph.D., former Assistant Professor and Chairman Department of
Philosophy, UND, now philosophy instructor, Bismarck State College, and
violin maker. "Nothing would make me prouder to be a North Dakotan than to
have my state lead the nation in outlawing this brutal practice." 1992. [ND
was the first state to  outlaw the practice of female genital mutilation of
minors in 1994.]

Other Citizens

Renee Bergstrom, psychologist and health educator now living in Elgin, MN,
speaking out publicly for the first time, and videotaped, at the Third
International Symposium on Circumcision, University of Maryland, Washington
DC, May 1994:  "I was born and raised on a farm in South Dakota (to very
loving parents), and when I was three years old, my mother who was
concerned about the fact that I was masturbating (she had read some place
that it was the ultimate sin), took me to a doctor in a clinic in
[Wahpeton] North Dakota, who took me to a hospital in [Breckenridge]
Minnesota and removed my clitoris. My mother was at the end of the table. I
remember the pain, and I also remember knowing that I couldn't trust her
any more...."  [Emphasis added.] She went on to explain how the
clitoridectomy has ruined much of her life, and how clergy, counselors and
physicians have been no comfort.]

Ramona T. Goheen, in a letter, 9/3/94, to the North Dakota Board of Medical
Examiners: "I brought my son in to get Dr. Neto's opinion on surgery
regarding his hypospadias. He said that my son did not need reconstructive
surgery to the urinary hole, but should be circumcised so he, 'Doesn't get
picked on by other boys because he won't be urinating straight.' He also
stated that 'He won't learn as well in school if he doesn't get
circumcised'....He forcibly retracted the foreskin without my permission
causing it to redden, bleed, and swell, causing extreme pain to my son. I
said to him, ' I thought you were supposed to leave it (the foreskin)
alone,' while he was doing this, but he still proceeded to force it back
even after I said this. He gave no explanation for forcibly retracting the
foreskin from the glans. If anyone else would have done that to my son, I
would have them arrested." [See Roff Sletten's  NDBME's reply above under
"Attorneys".]

Jody McLaughlin, NA Representative, Primal Health Research Centre, London
and editor of the Compleat Mother magazine: "Circumcision is
institutionalized quackery." 1995.

Female Minot High School student after watching the suffering during three
circumcisions in a local hospital as part of a career orientation course in
nursing: "There must be a very important reason for doing this!"

A mother after learning routine circumcision is not medically necessary: "I
now know why my son who is 28, married, in college in Utah asked me about
why I did this to him. I couldn't understand why he even brought the topic
up. Now I know...."

 25 year old Fargo business man when asked whether he was circumcised: "I
don't know."

A North Dakotan raised as a Jew: "I don't think I would circumcise my sons."

College Students Exposed to Circumcision Information

Mother and student: "I have to tell you that I feel just awful for
circumcising my son. I really did think that I was doing him a big
favor....This is really hard for me to handle. I can't imagine how other
people feel, when they don't even know why they had them circumcised. I
honestly thought I was doing him a favor. I would now wait until he was old
enough, to see if he even had a problem with it....I feel I owe my son an
apology when he gets older."

"The film was the first time I actually knew exactly what they do when a
baby is circumcised. The crying was so bad and just to know that doctors
would do such things to a little baby for no [medical] reason is so sick!
Just watching and listening to this film made my stomach turn!"

"The tape was an eye opener and a stomach turner. I definitely would want
both my husband and me to have to be informed before making any decisions."
"The film I feel was rough to watch but it was worth seeing."

"I don't see why such a big fuss is made about circumcision. Women suffer
all the time. Their hymen is ripped; they have pain in birth; hot flashes
in menopause, etc. Men should have some pain too." Female BSC student who
two months later changed her mind when her girl friend had a baby boy.

Mother and student: "I didn't have my son circumcised and the doctor gave
me a hard time for years....He said the military will do it anyway."

 Pre-med student: "My boy friend won't marry me unless I agree to
circumcise our sons."

"The substitute doctor walked into the room, said he had just mutilated my
child and walked out. I wish he had talked to me before he did it, if he
felt that pained about it."

"Do medical staff get into trouble for trying to inform parents further
about circumcision?"  [Yes.]

Female BSC student: "I was so ignorant that when the doctor asked me about
doing the surgery, I had never really understood what they even did. I
would never have even thought to ask for this surgery. She [the nurse with
the consent form to sign] came to me. I guess I had only seen circumcised
males and didn't even recognized they were circumcised."

"No one has the right to do genital mutilations on children. If you were
born with it, then let be. I just can't understand why would any one want
to torture someone that way for no medical reason at all." Male student.

"I think hospitals should show this film [on infant male circumcision] to
parents before they perform the circumcision."

"Have you ever suggested that it be shown during Lamaze classes?"

"The videos were hard to watch but very necessary to give informed consent
for the procedures."

BSC ethics student, 11/94: "Watching the FGM was even worse the 2nd
time...because I knew  what was coming. The MGM was bad. I couldn't believe
it. That baby goes through hell. I can't believe what I put my son through.
No wonder he was crying so hard when they brought him to me. He went
through hell. I'm glad you made this video available for us to watch...."

"I was shocked at how cruel circumcision is."

"I was too shocked after watching the video [on infant male circumcision]
to be able to write anything coherent on my [daily 3x5] card. But that
night, at home, I told my husband about the videos and asked him, 'Why do
you still see fit to perform circumcision?' (He is a neonatologist, and
that is [one thing] he does for a living.) Our own two boys are not
circumcised....
   But when I asked him that night after watching the video, 'What good do
you as a person and doctor see in this procedure,' he told me, 'The good I
see is that it does reduce sensitivity, [and] the full force of sexual
drive. Man is not [meant] to be subjected to the full force of his sexual
drives, but instead to God.' What he was talking about is Paul and his
advices about sexuality (being sinful, of course).
   Well, then I asked him, 'What is wrong with being sexual? We are
supposed to be, otherwise, God would not have seen fit to give us such a
drive.' He insisted that it is the purpose [for sex] that matters. As
'Godly' beings we are called to transform it into something higher. From
that point our conversation turned into fighting. I've been his wife for
years, but I did not know that sexuality for him is 'lower' and 'lesser,'
and that the purpose of it is just offspring, not on its own a joy.
   I guess what I am sharing is this: I've discovered, through this topic
of yours in class, a can of worms in my intimate sexual relationship that
made me more sick than the explicit videos I watched. In a few years I
might not remember Anaximenes, but I will my husband's remarks...!'
Thanks." [This quotation shows the close tie that can exist between
personal religious beliefs and medical practice.]

Male student, 1995: "When I first found out about circumcision, I heard
that is was done as part of a religious practice. I didn't really
understand this at that time. When I got older I found it is still a very
common practice. I asked my mother about it, and she said it is something
little boys have done [to them] when they are born. I found this extremely
disturbing. She said it was for hygiene. The thoughts I had about this
[comment on cleanliness] was: What happened before anyone thought of
circumcision? Did every male's organ just get diseased and fall off? I
found this absurd. It couldn't just happen. I felt very angry for a long
time about this misjustice: Feeling that you can be violated as a child in
a way you couldn't even imagine was possible, until you learn about it."
[Is it already too late to save the medical profession's prestige and legal
culpability?]

Female pre-med student to Dr. Voskuil: "I would like to know something,
O.K. Now I understand the concern, but if it has been going on for so many
years, and it is so bad, then why has it gone on? I mean how can you know
so much when our own doctors don't know that much? How can you say this has
to be stopped? You can't know everything, yes?! Now, I'm not questioning
your IQ. It just seems weird that if this was so painful & and hurtful that
it would have gone on for so long. Plus, where do you think the doctors get
their information? If not from medical school, then where? It is hard to
believe doctors hurting patients for $200 or so. They are suppose to know
how to heal--that's what they are taught." [Will the NDBME answer this
woman's questions?]

"I think, as a mother of two boys and a wife, [circumcision] is a good
thing to discuss. I found out things today I as a mother was never told.
There are harms that last the child's whole life. I have to truly say I'm
pissed off I didn't hear these things from my doctor. Maybe, I would have
not have had it done to my baby boys, if I would have known half of this!"
[Perhaps the reason she didn't hear these things has to do with the silence
of our watchdog boards. Are they legally negligent because she did not
hear?]
